
				                   			
#2#1[]




































Production Note

Cornell University Library produced this volume to replace the 

irreparably deteriorated original. It was scanned using Xerox 

software and equipment at 600 dots per inch resolution and com- 

pressed prior to storage using CCITT Group 4 compression. The 

digital data were used to create Cornell's replacement volume 

on paper that meets the ANSI Standard Z39.48-1984. The produc- 

tion of this volume was supported in part by the Commission on 

Preservation and Access and the Xerox Corporation. Digital 

file copyright by Cornell University Library 1991.

Transcriber's Note: The Index has been regenerated
to fit the pagination of this edition. Despite the author's stated hope that "few misprints
have escaped detection" there were several, which have here been corrected and
noted at the end of the text. 



CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY

1in

THE EVAN WILHELM EVANS 

MATHEMATICAL SEMINARY LIBRARY

1in

THE GIFT OF 

LUCIEN AUGUSTUS WAIT







THE ELEMENTS OF EUCLID.




NOW READY

0.5in

Price 3s.

A TREATISE ON ELEMENTARY TRIGONOMETRY,

With Numerous Examples and Questions for Examination.


1in

Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged, Price 3s. 6d., Cloth. 

A SEQUEL TO THE FIRST SIX BOOKS OF THE 

ELEMENTS OF EUCLID, 

Containing an Easy Introduction to Modern Geometry: 

With numerous Examples.

1in

Third Edition, Price 4s. 6d.; or in two parts, each 2s. 6d. 

THE ELEMENTS OF EUCLID, BOOKS I.-VI., AND 

PROPOSITIONS I.-XXI., OF BOOK XI.; 

Together with an Appendix on the Cylinder, Sphere, 

Cone, c.: with 

Copious Annotations  numerous Exercises.

1in

Price 6s. 

A KEY TO THE EXERCISES IN THE FIRST SIX 

BOOKS OF CASEY'S ELEMENTS OF EUCLID.

1in

Price 7s. 6d.

A TREATISE ON THE ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY OF 

THE POINT, LINE, CIRCLE,  CONIC SECTIONS, 

Containing an Account of its most recent Extensions, 

With numerous Examples.

1in

DUBLIN: HODGES, FIGGIS,  CO. 

LONDON: LONGMANS  CO.




THE FIRST SIX BOOKS
OF THE
ELEMENTS OF EUCLID,
AND
PROPOSITIONS I.-XXI. OF BOOK XI.,
AND AN
APPENDIX ON THE CYLINDER, SPHERE,

CONE, ETC.,
WITH
COPIOUS ANNOTATIONS AND NUMEROUS EXERCISES.
BY
JOHN CASEY, LL.D., F.R.S.,
FELLOW OF THE ROYAL UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND;

MEMBER OF COUNCIL, ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY;

MEMBER OF THE MATHEMATICAL SOCIETIES OF LONDON AND FRANCE;

AND PROFESSOR OF THE HIGHER MATHEMATICS AND OF

MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS IN THE CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF IRELAND.
144f000


THIRD EDITION, REVISED AND ENLARGED.
DUBLIN: HODGES, FIGGIS,  CO., GRAFTON-ST.

LONDON: LONGMANS, GREEN,  CO.

1885.





DUBLIN
PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS,
BY PONSONBY AND WELDRICK





PREFACE.


[1ex]1.5cm



This edition of the Elements of Euclid, undertaken
at the request of the principals of some of
the leading Colleges and Schools of Ireland, is
intended to supply a want much felt by teachers
at the present day-the production of a work
which, while giving the unrivalled original in
all its integrity, would also contain the modern
conceptions and developments of the portion of
Geometry over which the Elements extend. A
cursory examination of the work will show that
the Editor has gone much further in this latter
direction than any of his predecessors, for it will
be found to contain, not only more actual matter
than is given in any of theirs with which he is
acquainted, but also much of a special character,
which is not given, so far as he is aware, in any
former work on the subject. The great extension
of geometrical methods in recent times has made
such a work a necessity for the student, to enable
him not only to read with advantage, but even to
understand those mathematical writings of modern
times which require an accurate knowledge
of Elementary Geometry, and to which it is in
reality the best introduction.

In compiling his work the Editor has received
invaluable assistance from the late Rev. Professor
Townsend, s.f.t.c.d. The book was rewritten
and considerably altered in accordance with his
suggestions, and to that distinguished Geometer
it is largely indebted for whatever merit it possesses.

The Questions for Examination in the early part
of the First Book are intended as specimens,
which the teacher ought to follow through the
entire work. Every person who has had experience
in tuition knows well the importance
of such examinations in teaching Elementary
Geometry.

The Exercises, of which there are over eight
hundred, have been all selected with great care.
Those in the body of each Book are intended as
applications of Euclid's Propositions. They are
for the most part of an elementary character, and
may be regarded as common property, nearly
every one of them having appeared already in
previous collections. The Exercises at the end
of each Book are more advanced; several are
due to the late Professor Townsend, some are
original, and a large number have been taken
from two important French works-Catalan'sThéorèmes et Problèmes de Géométrie Elémentaire,
and the Traité de Géométrie, by Rouché and
De Comberousse.

The second edition has been thoroughly revised
and greatly enlarged. The new matter includes
several alternative proofs, important examination
questions on each of the books, an explanation of
the ratio of incommensurable quantities, the first
twenty-one propositions of Book XI., and an
Appendix on the properties of the Prism, Pyramids,
Cylinder, Sphere, and Cone.

The present Edition has been very carefully
read throughout, and it is hoped that few misprints
have escaped detection.

The Editor is glad to find from the rapid sale of
former editions (each 3000 copies) of his Book, and
its general adoption in schools, that it is likely to
accomplish the double object with which it was
written, viz. to supply students with a Manual
that will impart a thorough knowledge of the
immortal work of the great Greek Geometer, and
introduce them, at the same time, to some of the
most important conceptions and developments of
the Geometry of the present day.


JOHN CASEY. 





THE ELEMENTS OF EUCLID.

[1ex]3cm
INTRODUCTION.


Geometry is the Science of figured Space. Figured
Space is of one, two, or three dimensions, according
as it consists of lines, surfaces, or solids. The
boundaries of solids are surfaces; of surfaces, lines;
and of lines, points. Thus it is the province of
Geometry to investigate the properties of solids,
of surfaces, and of the figures described on surfaces.
The simplest of all surfaces is the plane,
and that department of Geometry which is occupied
with the lines and curves drawn on a plane
is called Plane Geometry; that which demonstrates
the properties of solids, of curved surfaces, and the
figures described on curved surfaces, is Geometry
of Three Dimensions. The simplest lines that can
be drawn on a plane are the right line and circle,
and the study of the properties of the point, the
right line, and the circle, is the introduction to
Geometry, of which it forms an extensive and important
department. This is the part of Geometry
on which the oldest Mathematical Book in existence,
namely, Euclid's Elements, is written, and
is the subject of the present volume. The conic
sections and other curves that can be described on
a plane form special branches, and complete the
divisions of this, the most comprehensive of all the
Sciences. The student will find in Chasles' Aperçu
Historique a valuable history of the origin and
the development of the methods of Geometry.



[1ex]5cm


In the following work, when figures are not
drawn, the student should construct them from the
given directions. The Propositions of Euclid will
be printed in larger type, and will be referred to
by Roman numerals enclosed in brackets. Thus
[III. xxxii.] will denote the 32nd Proposition
of the 3rd Book. The number of the Book will
be given only when different from that under
which the reference occurs. The general and the
particular enunciation of every Proposition will be
given in one. By omitting the letters enclosed
in parentheses we have the general enunciation,
and by reading them, the particular. The annotations
will be printed in smaller type. The
following symbols will be used in them:-



In addition to these we shall employ the usual
symbols , , c. of Algebra, and also the sign
of congruence, namely . This symbol has been
introduced by the illustrious Gauss.




BOOK ITheory of Angles, Triangles, Parallel Lines, and parallelograms.


The Point.
i. A point is that which has position but not dimensions.


A geometrical magnitude which has three dimensions, that is,
length, breadth, and thickness, is a solid; that which has two
dimensions, such as length and breadth, is a surface; and that
which has but one dimension is a line. But a point is neither a
solid, nor a surface, nor a line; hence it has no dimensions-that
is, it has neither length, breadth, nor thickness.
footnotesize


The Line.
ii. A line is length without breadth.


A line is space of one dimension. If it had any breadth, no
matter how small, it would be space of two dimensions; and if in
addition it had any thickness it would be space of three dimensions;
hence a line has neither breadth nor thickness.
footnotesize

iii. The intersections of lines and their extremities
are points.


1082f262

iv. A line which lies evenly between its extreme
points is called a straight or right
line, such as .


If a point move without changing its direction it will describe
a right line. The direction in which a point moves in called its
"sense." If the moving point continually changes its direction
it will describe a curve; hence it follows that only one right line
can be drawn between two points. The following Illustration is
due to Professor Henrici:-"If we suspend a weight by a string,
the string becomes stretched, and we say it is straight, by which
we mean to express that it has assumed a peculiar definite shape.
If we mentally abstract from this string all thickness, we obtain
the notion of the simplest of all lines, which we call a straight
line."
footnotesize


The Plane.

v. A surface is that which has length and breadth.


A surface is space of two dimensions. It has no thickness, for if
it had any, however small, it would be space of three dimensions.
footnotesize

vi.  When a surface is such that the right line joining
any two arbitrary points in it lies wholly in the
surface, it is called a plane.

A plane is perfectly flat and even, like the surface of still
water, or of a smooth floor.-Newcomb.footnotesize


Figures.
vii. Any combination of points, of lines, or of points
and lines in a plane, is called a plane figure. If a figure
be formed of points only it is called a stigmatic figure;
and if of right lines only, a rectilineal figure.
viii. Points which lie on the same right line are
called collinear points. A figure formed of collinear
points is called a row of points.

The Angle.
ix. The inclination of two right lines extending out
from one point in different directions is called a rectilineal
angle.


x. The two lines are called the legs, and the point
the vertex of the angle.

11311f001

A right line drawn from the vertex and turning about it in the
plane of the angle, from the position of coincidence with one leg
to that of coincidence with the other, is said to turn through the
angle, and the angle is the greater as the quantity of turning is
the greater. Again, since the line may turn from one position to
the other in either of two ways, two angles are formed by two
lines drawn from a point.

Thus if ,  be the legs, a line
may turn from the position  to the
position  in the two ways indicated
by the arrows. The smaller of the angles
thus formed is to be understood as
the angle contained by the lines. The
larger, called a re-entrant angle, seldom
occurs in the "Elements."
footnotesize

xi. Designation of Angles.-A particular angle in a
figure is denoted by three letters, as , of which the
middle one, , is at the vertex, and the other two along
the legs. The angle is then read .

300f002

xii. The angle formed by joining two or more angles
together is called their sum. Thus the sum of the two
angles ,  is the angle ,
1297f003
formed by applying
the side  to the side , so that the vertex  shall
fall on the vertex , and the
side  on the opposite side
of  from .

xiii. When the sum of two
angles ,  is such that
the legs ,  form one right
line, they are called supplements of each other.


Hence, when one line stands on another, the two angles which
it makes on the same side of that on which it stands are supplements
of each other.
footnotesize


1217f004
xiv. When one line stands on another, and makes
the adjacent angles at both
sides of itself equal, each of
the angles is called a right
angle, and the line which
stands on the other is called
a perpendicular to it.



Hence a right angle is equal to its supplement.
footnotesize

xv. An acute angle is one which is less than a right
angle, as .

266f005

xvi. An obtuse angle is one which is greater than a
right angle, as .


The supplement of an acute angle is obtuse, and conversely, the
supplement of an obtuse
angle is acute.
footnotesize

1007f006
xvii. When the sum of two angles
is a right angle, each is called the
complement of the other. Thus, if
the angle  be right, the angles
,  are complements of each
other.


Concurrent Lines.
xviii. Three or more right lines passing through the
same point are called concurrent lines.

xix. A system of more than three concurrent lines is
called a pencil of lines. Each line of a pencil is called
a ray, and the common point through which the rays
pass is called the vertex.



The Triangle.
xx. A triangle is a figure formed by three right
lines joined end to end. The three lines are called
its sides.

xxi. A triangle whose three sides are unequal is said
to be scalene, as ; a triangle having two sides equal,
to be isosceles, as ; and and having all its sides equal,
to be equilateral, as .

233f007

xxii. A right-angled triangle is one that has one of
its angles a right angle, as . The side which subtends
the right angle is called the hypotenuse.

xxiii. An obtuse-angled triangle is one that has one
of its angles obtuse, as .

xxiv. An acute-angled triangle is one that has its three
angles acute, as .

233f008

xxv. An exterior angle of a triangle is one that is
formed by any side and the continuation of another
side.


Hence a triangle has six exterior angles; and also each exterior
angle is the supplement of the adjacent interior angle.
footnotesize



The Polygon.
xxvi. A rectilineal figure bounded by more than three
right lines is usually called a polygon.

xxvii. A polygon is said to be convex when it has no
re-entrant angle.

xxviii. A polygon of four sides is called a quadrilateral.
xxix. A quadrilateral whose four sides are equal is
called a lozenge.
xxx. A lozenge which has a right angle is called a
square.
xxxi. A polygon which has five sides is called a
pentagon; one which has six sides, a hexagon, and so on.



The Circle.

957f009
xxxii. A circle is a plane figure formed by a curved
line called the circumference, and is
such that all right lines drawn
from a certain point within the
figure to the circumference are
equal to one another. This point
is called the centre.

xxxiii. A radius of a circle is
any right line drawn from the centre to the circumference,
such as .

xxxiv. A diameter of a circle is a right line drawn
through the centre and terminated both ways by the
circumference, such as .


From the definition of a circle it follows at once that the path
of a movable point in a plane which remains at a constant distance
from a fixed point is a circle; also that any point  in the plane is
inside, outside, or on the circumference of a circle according as
its distance from the centre is less than, greater than, or equal to,
the radius.
footnotesize


Postulates.
Let it be granted that-

i. A right line may be drawn from any one point to
any other point.


When we consider a straight line contained between two fixed
points which are its ends, such a portion is called a finite straight
line.
footnotesize

ii. A terminated right line may be produced to any
length in a right line.



Every right line may extend without limit in either direction
or in both. It is in these cases called an indefinite line. By this
postulate a finite right line may be supposed to be produced,
whenever we please, into an indefinite right line.
footnotesize

iii. A circle may be described from any centre, and
with any distance from that centre as radius.


1003f010

If there be two points  and , and if with any instruments,
such as a ruler and pen, we draw a line
from  to , this will evidently have some
irregularities, and also some breadth and
thickness. Hence it will not be a geometrical line no matter how
nearly it may approach to one. This is the reason that Euclid
postulates the drawing of a right line from one point to another.
For if it could be accurately done there would be no need for his
asking us to let it be granted. Similar observations apply to the
other postulates. It is also worthy of remark that Euclid never
takes for granted the doing of anything for which a geometrical
construction, founded on other problems or on the foregoing postulates,
can be given.
footnotesize



Axioms.
i. Things which are equal to the same, or to equals,
are equal to each other.


Thus, if there be three things, and if the first, and the second,
be each equal to the third, we infer by this axiom that the first is
equal to the second. This axiom relates to all kinds of magnitude.
The same is true of Axioms ii., iii., iv., v., vi., vii., ix.;
but viii., x., xi., xii., are strictly geometrical.
footnotesize

ii. If equals be added to equals the sums will be
equal.

iii. If equals be taken from equals the remainders
will be equal.

iv. If equals be added to unequals the sums will be
unequal.

v. If equals be taken from unequals the remainders
will be unequal.

vi. The doubles of equal magnitudes are equal.

vii. The halves of equal magnitudes are equal.

viii. Magnitudes that can be made to coincide are
equal.


The placing of one geometrical magnitude on another, such as a
line on a line, a triangle on a triangle, or a circle on a circle, c.,
is called superposition. The superposition employed in Geometry
is only mental, that is, we conceive one magnitude placed on the
other; and then, if we can prove that they coincide, we infer, by
the present axiom, that they are equal. Superposition involves the
following principle, of which, without explicitly stating it, Euclid
makes frequent use:-"Any figure may be transferred from one
position to another without change of form or size."
footnotesize

ix. The whole is greater than its part.


This axiom is included in the following, which is a fuller statement:-
footnotesize

ix. The whole is equal to the sum of all its parts.

x. Two right lines cannot enclose a space.


This is equivalent to the statement, "If two right lines have two
points common to both, they coincide in direction," that is, they
form but one line, and this holds true even when one of the points
is at infinity.
footnotesize

xi. All right angles are equal to one another.


This can be proved as follows:-Let there be two right lines
, , and two perpendiculars to them, namely, , , then
if ,  be made to coincide by superposition, so that the point
 will coincide with ; then since a right angle is equal to its
supplement, the line  must coincide with . Hence the
angle  is equal to .

xii. If two right lines  meet a third line
, so as to make the sum
of the two interior angles
 on the same
side less than two right angles,
these lines being produced
shall meet at some
finite distance.

132f011

This axiom is the converse of Prop. xvii., Book I.



Explanation of Terms.

Axioms.-"Elements of human reason," according to
Dugald Stewart, are certain general propositions, the
truths of which are self-evident, and which are so fundamental,
that they cannot be inferred from any propositions
which are more elementary; in other words,
they are incapable of demonstration. "That two sides
of a triangle are greater than the third" is, perhaps,
self-evident; but it is not an axiom, inasmuch as it can
be inferred by demonstration from other propositions;
but we can give no proof of the proposition that
"things which are equal to the same are equal to one
another," and, being self-evident, it is an axiom.

Propositions which are not axioms are properties of
figures obtained by processes of reasoning. They are
divided into theorems and problems.

A Theorem is the formal statement of a property that
may be demonstrated from known propositions. These
propositions may themselves be theorems or axioms. A
theorem consists of two parts, the hypothesis, or that
which is assumed, and the conclusion, or that which is
asserted to follow therefrom. Thus, in the typical
theorem,




the hypothesis is that  is , and the conclusion is
that  is .

Converse Theorems.-Two theorems are said to be
converse, each of the other, when the hypothesis of
either is the conclusion of the other. Thus the converse
of the theorem (i.) is-





From the two theorems (i.) and (ii.) we may infer
two others, called their contrapositives. Thus the contrapositive
*

The theorem (iv.) is called the obverse of (i.), and
(iii.) the obverse of (ii.).

A Problem is a proposition in which something is
proposed to be done, such as a line to be drawn, or a
figure to be constructed, under some given conditions.

The Solution of a problem is the method of construction
which accomplishes the required end.

The Demonstration is the proof, in the case of a
theorem, that the conclusion follows from the hypothesis;
and in the case of a problem, that the construction
accomplishes the object proposed.

The Enunciation of a problem consists of two parts,
namely, the data, or things supposed to be given, and
the quaesita, or things required to be done.

Postulates are the elements of geometrical construction,
and occupy the same relation with respect to
problems as axioms do to theorems.

A Corollary is an inference or deduction from a proposition.

A Lemma is an auxiliary proposition required in the
demonstration of a principal proposition.

A Secant or Transversal is a line which cuts a system
of lines, a circle, or any other geometrical figure.

Congruent figures are those that can be made to
coincide by superposition. They agree in shape and
size, but differ in position. Hence it follows, by
Axiom viii., that corresponding parts or portions of
congruent figures are congruent, and that congruent
figures are equal in every respect.

Rule of Identity.-Under this name the following
principle will be sometimes referred to:-"If there is
but one  and one , then, from the fact that  is ,
it necessarily follows that  is ."-Syllabus.


PROP. I.-Problem.On a given finite right line  to construct an equilateral triangle.

16410f012
Sol.-With  as centre, and  as radius, describe
the circle  (Post. iii.). With  as centre, and 
as radius, describe the
circle , cutting the
former circle in . Join
,  (Post. i.). Then
 is the equilateral
triangle required.

Dem.-Because  is
the centre of the circle
,  is equal to
 (Def. xxxii.). Again, because  is the centre of
the circle ,  is equal to . Hence we have
proved.
*
           &&  AC &= AB,  &&

and &&  BC &= AB.  &&and 

But things which are equal to the same are equal to
one another (Axiom i.); therefore  is equal to ;
therefore the three lines , ,  are equal to one
another. Hence the triangle  is equilateral (Def. xxi.);
and it is described on the given line , which
was required to be done.


Questions for Examination.


1. What is the datum in this proposition?

2. What is the quaesitum?

3. What is a finite right line?

4. What is the opposite of finite?

5. In what part of the construction is the third postulate
quoted? and for what purpose? Where is the first postulate
quoted?

6. Where is the first axiom quoted?

7. What use is made of the definition of a circle? What is a
circle?

8. What is an equilateral triangle?
footnotesize

Exercises.


The following exercises are to be solved when the pupil has
mastered the First Book:-

1. If the lines ,  be joined, the figure  is a lozenge.

2. If  be produced to  and , the triangles  and
 are equilateral.

3. If ,  be produced to meet the circles again in  and ,
the points , ,  are collinear, and the triangle  is equilateral.

4. If  be joined, .

5. Describe a circle in the space , bounded by the line 
and the two circles.
footnotesize


PROP. II.-Problem.From a given point  to draw a right line equal to
a given finite right line .

15013f013
Sol.-Join  (Post. i.); on  describe the equilateral
triangle 
[i.]. With  as centre,
and  as radius, describe
the circle 
(Post iii.). Produce
 to meet the circle
 in  (Post. ii.).
With  as centre, and
 as radius, describe
the circle  (Post. iii.).
Produce  to
meet this circle in .
 is equal to .

Dem.-Because  is
the centre of the circle ,  is equal to  (Def.
xxxii.). And because  is an equilateral triangle,
 is equal to  (Def. xxi.). Hence we have
*
&&               & DF = DE,  &&

& and  &  & DA = DB;  &&and 
and taking the latter from the former, the remainder
 is equal to the remainder  (Axiom iii.). Again,
because  is the centre of the circle ,  is equal
to ; and we have proved that  is equal to ;
and things which are equal to the same thing are equal
to one another (Axiom i.). Hence  is equal to .
Therefore from the given point  the line  has been
drawn equal to .


It is usual with commentators on Euclid to say that he allows
the use of the rule and compass. Were such the case this Proposition
would have been unnecessary. The fact is, Euclid's object
was to teach Theoretical and not Practical Geometry, and the only
things he postulates are the drawing of right lines and the describing
of circles. If he allowed the mechanical use of the rule and
compass he could give methods of solving many problems that
go beyond the limits of the "geometry of the point, line, and
circle."-See Notes D, F at the end of this work.
footnotesize

Exercises.


1. Solve the problem when the point  is in the line  itself.

2. Inflect from a given point  to a given line  a line equal
to a given line. State the number of solutions.
footnotesize


PROP. III.-Problem.From the greater  of two given right lines to cut off
a part equal to  the less.

13310f014
Sol.-From , one of the extremities of , draw
the right line  equal to 
[ii.]; and with  as centre,
and  as radius, describe
the circle  (Post. iii.)
cutting  in .  shall
be equal to .

Dem.-Because  is the
centre of the circle , 
is equal to  (Def. xxxii.),
and  is equal to  (const.); and things which are
equal to the same are equal to one another (Axiom i.);
therefore  is equal to . Wherefore from , the
greater of the two given lines, a part, , has been out off
equal to , the less.


Questions for Examination.


1. What previous problem is employed in the solution of this?

2. What postulate?

3. What axiom in the demonstration?

4. Show how to produce the less of two given lines until the
whole produced line becomes equal to the greater.
footnotesize


PROP. IV.-Theorem.If two triangles  have two sides 
of one equal respectively to two sides  of the
other, and have also the angles  included by those
sides equal, the triangles shall be equal in every respect-that
is, their bases or third sides  shall be equal,
and the angles  at the base of one shall be respectively
equal to the angles  at the base of the other;
namely, those shall be equal to which the equal sides are
opposite.

1638f015

Dem.-Let us conceive the triangle  to be applied
to , so that the
point  shall coincide with
, and the line  with
, and that the point 
shall be on the same side
of  as ; then because
 is equal to , the
point  shall coincide
with . Again, because the angle  is equal to
the angle , the line  shall coincide with ;
and since  is equal to  (hyp.), the point  shall
coincide with ; and we have proved that the point
 coincides with . Hence two points of the line 
coincide with two points of the line ; and since two
right lines cannot enclose a space,  must coincide
with . Hence the triangles agree in every respect;
therefore  is equal to , the angle  is equal to the
angle , the angle  to the angle , and the triangle 
to the triangle .


Questions for Examination.


1. How many parts in the hypothesis of this Proposition? Ans.
Three. Name them.

2. How many in the conclusion? Name them.

3. What technical term is applied to figures which agree in
everything but position? Ans. They are said to be congruent.

4. What is meant by superposition?

5. What axiom is made use of in superposition?

6. How many parts in a triangle? Ans. Six; namely, three
sides and three angles.

7. When it is required to prove that two triangles are congruent,
how many parts of one must be given equal to corresponding
parts of the other? Ans. In general, any three except
the three angles. This will be established in Props. viii. and
xxvi., taken along with iv.

8. What property of two lines having two common points is
quoted in this Proposition? They must coincide.
footnotesize

Exercises.


1. The line that bisects the vertical angle of an isosceles triangle
bisects the base perpendicularly.

2. If two adjacent sides of a quadrilateral be equal, and the
diagonal bisects the angle between them, their other sides are
equal.

3. If two lines be at right angles, and if each bisect the other,
then any point in either is equally distant from the extremities of
the other.

4. If equilateral triangles be described on the sides of any
triangle, the distances between the vertices of the original triangle
and the opposite vertices of the equilateral triangles are equal.
(This Proposition should be proved after the student has read
Prop. xxxii.)
footnotesize


PROP. V.-Theorem.The angles  at the base  of an isosceles
triangle are equal to one another, and if the equal sides
 be produced, the external angles 
below the base shall be equal.

12812f016

Dem.-In  take any point , and from , the
greater, cut off  equal to
 [iii]. Join , 
(Post. i.). Because  is
equal to  (const.), and 
is equal to  (hyp.), the
two triangles , 
have the sides ,  in
one respectively equal to the
sides ,  in the other;
and the included angle  is
common to both triangles.
Hence [iv.] the base  is
equal to , the angle  is equal to , and the
angle  is equal to the angle .

Again, because  is equal to  (const.), and 
to  (hyp.), the remainder, , is equal to  (Axiom
iii); and we have proved that  is equal to , and
the angle  equal to the angle . Hence the
two triangles ,  have the two sides ,  in
one equal to the two sides ,  in the other; and the
angle  contained by the two sides of one equal to the
angle  contained by the two sides of the other.
Therefore [iv.] these triangles have the angle 
equal to the angle , and these are the angles below
the base. Also the angle  equal to ; but the
whole angle  has been proved equal to the whole
angle . Hence the remaining angle  is equal
to the remaining angle , and these are the angles
at the base.


1459f017

Observation.-The great difficulty which beginners find in this
Proposition is due to the fact
that the two triangles ,
 overlap each other.
The teacher should make
these triangles separate, as
in the annexed diagram, and
point out the corresponding
parts thus:-
*

*
& Hence [iv.], &
  angle  ACF &= angle  ABG.  &&

& and  &
  angle  AFC &= angle  AGB.  &&

The student should also be shown how to apply one of the
triangles to the other, so as to bring them into coincidence. Similar
Illustrations may be given of the triangles , .

11010f018

The following is a very easy proof of this Proposition. Conceive
the  to be turned, without
alteration, round the line ,
until it falls on the other side. Let
 be its new position; then the
angle  of the displaced triangle is
evidently equal to the angle , with
which it originally coincided. Again,
the two ,  have the sides
,  of one respectively equal to
the sides ,  of the other, and
the included angles equal; therefore [iv.] the angle  opposite
to the side  is equal to the angle  opposite to the
side ; but the angle  is equal to ; therefore 
is equal to .
footnotesize

Cor.-Every equilateral triangle is equiangular.

Def.-A line in any figure, such as  in the preceding
diagram, which is such that, by folding the plane of the
figure round it, one part of the diagram will coincide with
the other, is called an axis of symmetry of the figure.

Exercises.


1. Prove that the angles at the base are equal without producing
the sides. Also by producing the sides through the vertex.

2. Prove that the line joining the point  to the intersection of
the lines  and  is an axis of symmetry of the figure.

3. If two isosceles triangles be on the same base, and be either
at the same or at opposite sides of it, the line joining their vertices
is an axis of symmetry of the figure formed by them.

4. Show how to prove this Proposition by assuming as an
axiom that every angle has a bisector.

5. Each diagonal of a lozenge is an axis of symmetry of the
lozenge.

6. If three points be taken on the sides of an equilateral triangle,
namely, one on each side, at equal distances from the
angles, the lines joining them form a new equilateral triangle.
footnotesize


PROP. VI.-Theorem.If two angles  of a triangle be equal, the sides
 opposite to them are also equal.

798f019

Dem.-If ,  are not equal, one must be greater
than the other. Suppose  is the
greater, and that the part  is equal
to . Join  (Post. i.). Then the
two triangles ,  have  equal
to , and  common to both. Therefore
the two sides ,  in one are
equal to the two sides ,  in the
other; and the angle  in one is
equal to the angle  in the other (hyp). Therefore
[iv.] the triangle  is equal to the triangle
-the less to the greater, which is absurd; hence
,  are not unequal, that is, they are equal.


Questions for Examination.


1. What is the hypothesis in this Proposition?

2. What Proposition is this the converse of?

3. What is the obverse of this Proposition?

4. What is the obverse of Prop. v.?

5. What is meant by an indirect proof?

6. How does Euclid generally prove converse Propositions?

7. What false assumption is made in the demonstration?

8. What does this assumption lead to?
footnotesize


PROP. VII-Theorem.If two triangles  on the same base 
and on the same side of it have one pair of conterminous
sides  equal to one another, the other pair of
conterminous sides  must be unequal.

808f020

Dem.-1. Let the vertex of each triangle be without
the other. Join . Then because
 is equal to  (hyp.), the triangle
 is isosceles; therefore [v.] the
angle  is equal to the angle ;
but  is greater than  (Axiom
ix.); therefore  is greater than
: much, more is  greater
than . Now if the side  were
equal to , the angle  would be
equal to  [v.]; but it has been proved to be
greater. Hence  is not equal to .

16010f021

2. Let the vertex of one triangle  fall within the
other triangle . Produce the sides ,  to  and .
Then because  is equal to  (hyp.), the triangle 
is isosceles, and [v.] the
external angles ,
 at the other side of
the base  are equal;
but  is greater than
 (Axiom ix.). Therefore
 is greater than
: much more is
 greater than ;
but if  were equal
to , the angle  would be equal to  [v.];
therefore  cannot be equal to .

3. If the vertex  of the second triangle fall on the
line , it is evident that  and  are unequal.


Questions for Examination.


1. What use is made of Prop. vii.? Ans. As a lemma to
Prop. viii.

2. In the demonstration of Prop. vii. the contrapositive of
Prop. v. occurs; show where.

3. Show that two circles can intersect each other only in one
point on the same side of the line joining their centres, and hence
that two circles cannot have more than two points of intersection.
footnotesize


PROP. VIII.-Theorem.If two triangles  have two sides 
of one respectively equal to two sides  of the
other, and have also the base  of one equal to the base
 of the other; then the two triangles shall be equal,
and the angles of one shall be respectively equal to the
angles of the other-namely, those shall be equal to which
the equal sides are opposite.1608f022

Dem.-Let the triangle  be applied to ,
so that the point  will coincide with , and the
line  with the line ; then because  is equal
to , the point  shall coincide with . Then if the
vertex  fall on the same side of  as the vertex ,
the point  must coincide
with ; for if not,
let it take a different
position ; then we have
 equal to , and 
is equal to  (hyp.).
Hence (Axiom i.)  is
equal to : in like
manner,  is equal to , and this is impossible [vii.].
Hence the point  must coincide with , and the
triangle  agrees in every respect with the triangle
; and therefore the three angles of one are respectively
equal to the three angles of the other-namely,  to
,  to , and  to , and the two triangles are equal.

This Proposition is the converse of iv., and is the
second case of the congruence of triangles in the
Elements.

177f023


Philo's Proof.-Let the equal bases be applied as in the foregoing
proof, but let the vertices be on the opposite sides; then let
 be the position which  takes. Join . Then because
, the angle . In like manner the angle . Hence the whole angle ; but 
therefore .
footnotesize


PROP. IX.-Problem.To bisect a given rectilineal angle .

12013f024

Sol.-In  take any point , and cut off [iii.] 
equal to . Join  (Post. i.),
and upon it, on the side remote
from , describe the equilateral
triangle  [i.] Join
.  bisects the given angle
.

Dem.-The triangles ,
 have the side  equal
to  (const.) and  common;
therefore the two sides , 
are respectively equal to ,
, and the base  is equal to
the base , because they are the sides of an equilateral
triangle (Def. xxi.). Therefore [viii.] the
angle  is equal to the angle ; hence the angle
 is bisected by the line .

Cor.-The line  is an axis of symmetry of the
figure.

Questions for Examination.


1. Why does Euclid describe the equilateral triangle on the
side remote from ?

2. In what case would the construction fail, if the equilateral
triangle were described on the other side of ?
footnotesize

Exercises.


1. Prove this Proposition without using Prop. viii.

2. Prove that  is perpendicular to .

3. Prove that any point in  is equally distant from the
points  and .

4. Prove that any point in  is equally distant from the lines
, .
footnotesize



PROP. X.-Problem.To bisect a given finite right line .

1009f025

Sol.-Upon  describe an equilateral triangle 
[i.]. Bisect the angle  by the
line  [ix.], meeting  in , then
 is bisected in .

Dem.-The two triangles ,
, have the side  equal to ,
being the sides of an equilateral
triangle, and  common. Therefore
the two sides ,  in one
are equal to the two sides ,  in the other; and the
angle  is equal to the angle  (const.). Therefore
the base  is equal to the base  [iv.]. Hence
 is bisected in .

Exercises.


1. Show how to bisect a finite right line by describing two
circles.

2. Every point equally distant from the points ,  is in the
line .
footnotesize


PROP. XI.-Problem.From a given point  in a given right line  to draw
a right line perpendicular to the given line.1908f026

Sol.-In  take any point , and make  equal
to  [iii.]. Upon
 describe an
equilateral triangle
 [i.]. Join .
Then  shall be at
right angles to .

Dem.-The two
triangles , 
have  equal to  (const.) and  common; therefore
the two sides ,  in one are respectively equal
to the two sides ,  in the other, and the base 
is equal to the base , being the sides of an equilateral
triangle (Def. xxi.); therefore [viii.] the angle
 is equal to the angle , and they are adjacent angles. Therefore (Def. xiii.) each of them is a right
angle, and  is perpendicular to  at the point .

Exercises.


1. The diagonals of a lozenge bisect each other perpendicularly.
2. Prove Prop. xi. without using Prop. viii.

3. Erect a line at right angles to a given line at one of its extremities
without producing the line.

4. Find a point in a given line that shall be equally distant
from two given points.

5. Find a point in a given line such that, if it be joined to two
given points on opposite sides of the line, the angle formed by the
joining lines shall be bisected by the given line.

6. Find a point that shall be equidistant from three given
points.
footnotesize


PROP. XII.-Problem.To draw a perpendicular to a given indefinite right line
 from a given point  without it.

1808f027

Sol.-Take any point  on the other side of , and
describe (Post. iii.)
a circle, with  as
centre, and  as
radius, meeting 
in the points  and .
Bisect  in  [x.].
Join  (Post. i.).
 shall be at right
angles to .

Dem.-Join , . Then the two triangles ,
 have  equal to  (const.), and  common;
and the base  equal to the base , being radii of
the circle  (Def. xxxii.). Therefore the angle 
is equal to the angle  [viii.], and, being adjacent
angles, they are right angles (Def. xiii.). Therefore
 is perpendicular to .


Exercises.


1. Prove that the circle cannot meet  in more than two
points.

2. If one angle of a triangle be equal to the sum of the other two,
the triangle can be divided into the sum of two isosceles triangles,
and the base is equal to twice the line from its middle point to the
opposite angle.
footnotesize


PROP. XIII.-Theorem.The adjacent angles  which one right line
 standing on another  makes with it are either
both right angles, or their sum is equal to two right
angles.

230f028

Dem.-If  is perpendicular to , as in fig. 1,
the angles ,  are right angles. If not, draw
 perpendicular to  [xi.]. Now the angle  is
equal to the sum of the two angles ,  (Def. xi.).
Hence, adding the angle , the sum of the angles
,  is equal to the sum of the three angles ,
, . In like manner, the sum of the angles
,  is equal to the sum of the three angles
, , . And things which are equal to the
same are equal to one another. Therefore the sum of
the angles ,  is equal to the sum of the angles
, ; but ,  are right angles; therefore
the sum of the angles ,  is two right angles.


Or thus: Denote the angle  by ; then evidently




Cor. 1.-The sum of two supplemental angles is two
right angles.

Cor. 2.-Two right lines cannot have a common
segment.

Cor. 3.-The bisector of any angle bisects the corresponding
re-entrant angle.

Cor. 4.-The bisectors of two supplemental angles
are at right angles to each other.

Cor. 5.-The angle  is half the difference of the
angles , .


PROP. XIV.-Theorem.If at a point  in a right line  two other right
lines  on opposite sides make the adjacent angles
 together equal to two right angles, these
two right lines form one continuous line.1409f029

Dem.-If  be not the continuation of , let 
be its continuation. Now, since  is a right line,
and  stands on it, the sum of the angles , 
is two right angles (xiii.); and the sum of the angles
,  is two right angles
(hyp.); therefore the sum of
the angles ,  is equal
to the sum of the angles
, . Reject the angle
, which is common, and
we have the angle  equal
to the angle -that is,
a part equal to the whole-which
is absurd. Hence  must be in the same right
line with .


PROP. XV.-Theorem.If two right lines  intersect one another,
the opposite angles are equal , and .

1208f030

Dem.-Because the line  stands on , the sum
of the angles ,  is two
right angles [xiii.]; and because
the line  stands on ,
the sum of the angles ,
 is two right angles; therefore
the sum of the angles ,
 is equal to the sum of the
angles , . Reject the
angle , which is common, and we have the angle
 equal to . In like manner, the angle 
is equal to .

The foregoing proof may be briefly given, by saying
that opposite angles are equal because they have a
common supplement.

Questions for Examination on Props. XIII., XIV., XV.


1. What problem is required in Euclid's proof of Prop. xiii.?

2. What theorem? Ans. No theorem, only the axioms.

3. If two lines intersect, how many pairs of supplemental
angles do they make?


4. What relation does Prop. xiv. bear to Prop. xiii.?

5. What three lines in Prop. xiv. are concurrent?

6. What caution is required in the enunciation of Prop. xiv.?

7. State the converse of Prop. xv. Prove it.

8. What is the subject of Props. xiii., xiv., xv.? Ans. Angles
at a point.
footnotesize


PROP. XVI.-Theorem.If any side  of a triangle  be produced, the
exterior angle  is greater than either of the interiornon-adjacent angles.11011f031

Dem.-Bisect  in  [x.]. Join  (Post. i.).
Produce it, and from the produced
part cut off  equal to  [iii].
Join . Now because  is equal
to  (const.), and  is equal
to , the triangles , 
have the sides ,  in one
equal to the sides ,  in the
other; and the angle  equal
to  [xv.]. Therefore [iv.]
the angle  is equal to ;
but the angle  is greater
than ; therefore the angle
 is greater than .

In like manner it may be shown, if the side  be
produced, that the exterior angle  is greater than
the angle ; but  is equal to  [xv.]. Hence
 is greater than . Therefore  is greater
than either of the interior non-adjacent angles  or  of
the triangle .

Cor. 1.-The sum of the three interior angles of the
triangle  is equal to the sum of the three interior
angles of the triangle .

Cor. 2.-The area of  is equal to the area of
.


Cor. 3.-The lines  and , if produced, cannot
meet at any finite distance. For, if they met at any
finite point , the triangle  would have an exterior
angle  equal to the interior angle .


PROP. XVII.-Theorem.Any two angles  of a triangle  are together
less than two right angles.

1057f032

Dem.-Produce  to ; then the exterior angle
 is greater than  [xvi.]:
to each add the angle , and
we have the sum of the angles
,  greater than the sum
of the angles , ; but the
sum of the angles ,  is
two right angles [xiii.]. Therefore
the sum of the angles ,
 is less than two right angles.

In like manner we may show that the sum of the
angles , , or of the angles , , is less than two
right angles.

Cor. 1.-Every triangle must have at least two
acute angles.

Cor. 2.-If two angles of a triangle be unequal, the
lesser must be acute.

Exercise.


Prove Prop. xvii. without producing a side.
footnotesize


PROP. XVIII.-Theorem.If in any triangle  one side  be greater than
another , the angle opposite to the greater side is
greater than the angle opposite to the less.

1337f033

Dem.-From  cut off  equal to  [iii].
Join  (Post. i.). Now
since  is equal to , the
triangle  is isosceles;
therefore [v.] the angle 
is equal to ; but the angle
 is greater than the angle
 [xvi.]; therefore 
is greater than .  Much more is the angle 
greater than the angle .

1336f034

Or thus: From  as centre,
with the lesser side  as radius,
describe the circle ,
cutting  in . Join .
Now since  is equal to ,
the angle  is equal to
; but  is greater than
 (xvi.); therefore  is greater than .

Exercises.


1. If in the second method the circle cut the line  produced
through , prove the Proposition.

2. This Proposition may be proved by producing the less side.

3. If two of the opposite sides of a quadrilateral be respectively
the greatest and least, the angles adjacent to the least are greater
than their opposite angles.

4. In any triangle, the perpendicular from the vertex opposite
the side which is not less than either of the remaining sides falls
within the triangle.
footnotesize


PROP. XIX.-Theorem.If one angle  of a triangle  be greater than
another angle , the side  which it opposite to the
greater angle is greater than the side  which is opposite
to the less.

1158f035

Dem.-If  be not greater than , it must be
either equal to it or less than it.
Let us examine each case:-

1. If  were equal to ,
the triangle  would be
isosceles, and then the angle 
would be equal to  [v.]; but it
is not by hypothesis; therefore
 is not equal to .

2. If  were less than , the angle  would be
less than the angle  [xviii.]; but it is not by hypothesis;
therefore  is not less than ; and since  is
neither equal to  nor less than it, it must be greater.

Exercises.


1. Prove this Proposition by a direct demonstration.

2. A line from the vertex of an isosceles triangle to any point
in the base is less than either of the equal sides, but greater if the
point be in the base produced.

3. Three equal lines could not be drawn from the same point
to the same line.

4. The perpendicular is the least line which can be drawn from
a given point to a given line; and of all others that may be
drawn to it, that which is nearest to the perpendicular is less
than any one more remote.

5. If in the fig., Prop. xvi.,  be the greatest side of the
,  is the greatest side of the , and the angle 
is less than half the angle .

6. If  be a  having  not greater than , a line ,
drawn from  to any point  in , is less than . For the
angle  [xviii.] is not greater than ; but  [xvi.] is
greater than ; therefore  is greater than . Hence
 is greater than .
footnotesize


PROP. XX.-Theorem.The sum of any two sides  of a triangle 
is greater than the third.

15010f036

Dem.-Produce  to  (Post. ii.), and make 
equal to  [iii.]. Join
. Then because  is
equal to , the angle
 is equal to  (v.);
therefore the angle 
is greater than the angle
; hence the side 
opposite to the greater angle
is greater than  opposite
to the less [xix.]. Again,
since  is equal to ,
adding  to both, we have the sum of the sides ,
 equal to . Therefore the sum of ,  is
greater than .


Or thus: Bisect the angle  by  [ix.] Then the angle
 is greater than ; but  (const.); therefore
the angle  is greater than . Hence  is greater than
 [xix.]. In like manner  is greater than . Therefore
the sum of ,  is greater than .
footnotesize

Exercises.


1. In any triangle, the difference between any two sides is less
than the third.

2. If any point within a triangle be joined to its angular points,
the sum of the joining lines is greater than its semiperimeter.

3. If through the extremities of the base of a triangle, whose
sides are unequal, lines be drawn to any point in the bisector of
the vertical angle, their difference is less than the difference of
the sides.

4. If the lines be drawn to any point in the bisector of the
external vertical angle, their sum is greater than the sum of the
sides.

5. Any side of any polygon is less than the sum of the remaining
sides.

6. The perimeter of any triangle is greater than that of any
inscribed triangle, and less than that of any circumscribed triangle.

7. The perimeter of any polygon is greater than that of any
inscribed, and less than that of any circumscribed, polygon of the
same number of sides.

8. The perimeter of a quadrilateral is greater than the sum of
its diagonals.

Def.-A line drawn from any angle of a triangle to the middle
point of the opposite side is called a median of the triangle.

9. The sum of the three medians of a triangle is less than its
perimeter.

10. The sum of the diagonals of a quadrilateral is less than the
sum of the lines which can be drawn to its angular points from
any point except the intersection of the diagonals.
footnotesize


PROP. XXI.-Theorem.If two lines  be drawn to a point  within
a triangle from the extremities of its base , their sum
is less than the sum of the remaining sides , but
they contain a greater angle.

1258f037

Dem.-1. Produce  (Post. ii.) to meet  in .
Then, in the triangle , the
sum of the sides ,  is
greater than the side  [xx.]:
to each add , and we have
the sum of ,  greater
than the sum of , . Again,
the sum of the sides ,  of
the triangle  is greater
than : to each add , and
we get the sum of ,  greater than the sum of ,
; but it has been proved that the sum of ,  is
greater than the sum of , . Therefore much
more is the sum of ,  greater than the sum of
, .


2. The external angle  of the triangle  is
greater than the internal angle  [xvi.], and the angle
, for a like reason, is greater than . Therefore
much more is  greater than .

Part 2 may be proved without producing either of
the sides , . Thus: join  and produce it to
meet  in ; then the angle  is greater than
the angle  [xvi.], and  is greater than .
Therefore the whole angle  is greater than .

1388f038

Exercises.


1. The sum of the lines drawn from any point within a triangle
to its angular points is less than
the perimeter. (Compare Ex. 2,
last Prop.)

2. If a convex polygonal line
 lie within a convex polygonal
line  terminating in
the same extremities, the length of
the former is less than that of the
latter.

footnotesize


PROP. XXII.-Problem.To construct a triangle whose three sides shall be respectively
equal to three given lines , the sum of every
two of which is greater than the third.

Sol.-Take any right line , terminated at , but
unlimited towards , and cut off [iii.]  equal to ,
 equal to , and  equal to . With  as centre,
and  as radius, describe the circle  (Post. iii.);
and with  as centre, and  as radius, describe the
circle , intersecting the former circle in . Join
, .  is the triangle required.

290f039

Dem.-Since  is the centre of the circle , 
is equal to ; but  is equal to  (const.); therefore
(Axiom i.)  is equal to . In like manner 
is equal to , and  is equal to  (const.) Hence
the three sides of the triangle  are respectively equal
to the three lines , , .

Questions for Examination.


1. What is the reason for stating in the enunciation that the
sum of every two of the given lines must be greater than the
third?

2. Prove that when that condition is fulfilled the two circles
must intersect.

3. Under what conditions would the circles not intersect?

4. If the sum of two of the lines were equal to the third, would
the circles meet? Prove that they would not intersect.
footnotesize


PROP. XXIII.-Problem.At a given point  in a given right line  to make
an angle equal to a given rectilineal angle .

270f040

Sol.-In the sides ,  of the given angle take
any arbitrary points  and . Join , and construct
[xxii.] the triangle , whose sides, taken in order,
shall be equal to those of -namely,  equal to
,  equal to , and  equal to ; then the
angle  will [viii.] be equal to . Hence it is
the required angle.


Exercises.


1. Construct a triangle, being given two sides and the angle
between them.

2. Construct a triangle, being given two angles and the side
between them.

3. Construct a triangle, being given two sides and the angle
opposite to one of them.

4. Construct a triangle, being given the base, one of the angles
at the base, and the sum or difference of the sides.

5. Given two points, one of which is in a given line, it is required
to find another point in the given line, such that the sum
or difference of its distances from the former points may be given.
Show that two such points may be found in each case.
footnotesize


PROP. XXIV.-Theorem.If two triangles  have two sides 
of one respectively equal to two sides  of the
other, but the contained angle  of one greater than
the contained angle  of the other, the base of that
which has the greater angle is greater than the base of the
other.

18012f041

Dem.-Of the two sides , , let  be the one
which is not the greater, and with it make the angle
 equal to  [xxiii.]. Then because  is not
greater than ,  is less than  [xix., Exer. 6].
Produce  to , and make  equal to  or 
[iii.]. Join , .

In the triangles
, , we have
 equal to 
(hyp.),  equal to
 (const.), and the
angle  equal
to the angle 
(const.); therefore the
base [iv.]  is equal
to . Again, because
 is equal to  (const.), the triangle  is isosceles;
therefore the angle  is equal to  [v.];
but  is greater than ; therefore  is
greater than : much more is the angle 
greater than , and the greater angle is subtended
by the greater side [xix.]. Therefore  is greater
than ; but  has been proved to be equal to ;
therefore  is greater than .

The concluding part of this Proposition may be proved without
joining , thus:-


*
Or thus: Bisect the angle  by . Join . Now in
the s ,  we have the sides ,  in one equal to
the sides ,  in the other, and the contained angles equal;
therefore the base  is equal to the base  [iv.]: to each add
, and we have  equal to the sum of , ; but the sum
of ,  is greater than  [xx.]. Therefore  is greater
than , that is, greater than .
footnotesize

Exercises.


1. Prove this Proposition by making the angle  to the
left of .

2. Prove that the angle  is greater than .
footnotesize


PROP. XXV.-Theorem.If two triangles  have two sides 
of one respectively equal to two sides  of the
other, but the base  of one greater than the base
 of the other, the angle  contained by the sides of
that which has the greater base is greater them the angle
 contained by the sides of the other.

19010f042

Dem.-If the angle  be not greater than , it must
be either equal to
it or less than it.
We shall examine
each case:-

1. If  were
equal to , the triangles
, 
would have the two
sides ,  of one
respectively equal
to the two sides ,  of the other, and the angle 
contained by the two sides of one equal to the angle 
contained by the two sides of the other. Hence [iv.]
 would be equal to ; but  is, by hypothesis,
greater than ; hence the angle  is not equal to
the angle .

2. If  were less than , then  would be greater
than , and the triangles ,  would have the two
sides ,  of one respectively equal to the two sides
,  of the other, and the angle  contained by the
two sides of one greater than the angle  contained by
the two sides of the other. Hence [xxiv.]  would be
greater than ; but  (hyp.) is not greater than .
Therefore  is not less than , and we have proved
that it is not equal to it; therefore it must be greater.

19010f043

Or thus, directly: Construct the triangle , whose
three sides , ,  shall be respectively equal to
the three sides , ,  of the triangle  [xxii.].
Join . Then because  is greater than ,  is
greater than . Hence [xviii.] the angle  is
greater than ;
and make (xxiii.)
the angle  equal
to , and join
. Then [vi.] 
is equal to .
Therefore the triangles
, 
have the sides ,
 of one equal to
the sides ,  of the other, and the base  equal to
. Therefore [viii.] the angle  is equal to .
Hence the angle  is greater than , and therefore
greater than .

Exercise.


Demonstrate this Proposition directly by cutting off from 
a part equal to .
footnotesize


PROP. XXVI.-Theorem.If two triangles  have two angles 
of one equal respectively to two angles  of the other,
and a side of one equal to a side similarly placed with
respect to the equal angles of the other, the triangles are
equal in every respect.

Dem.-This Proposition breaks up into two according
as the sides given to be equal are the sides adjacent
to the equal angles, namely  and , or those
opposite equal angles.

1409f044

1. Let the equal sides be  and ; then if  be
not equal to , suppose  to be equal to it. Join
; then the triangles ,  have the sides ,
 of one respectively equal to the sides ,  of
the other, and the angle  equal to the angle 
(hyp.); therefore [iv.] the angle  is equal to the
angle ; but the angle
 is (hyp.) equal to
; hence  is equal
to -a part equal to
the whole, which is absurd;
therefore  and  are
not unequal, that is, they
are equal.  Consequently
the triangles , 
have the sides ,  of one respectively equal to the
sides ,  of the other; and the contained angles
 and  equal; therefore [iv.]  is equal to
, and the angle  is equal to the angle .

1609f045

2. Let the sides given to be equal be  and ; it is required to prove that
 is equal to , and
 to . If  be
not equal to , suppose
 to be equal to it.
Join . Then the triangles
,  have
the two sides , 
of one respectively equal
to the two sides ,  of the other, and the angle
 equal to the angle ; therefore [iv.] the
angle  is equal to ; but the angle  is
equal to  (hyp.). Hence (Axiom i.) the angle
 is equal to , that is, the exterior angle of
the triangle  is equal to the interior and non-adjacent
angle, which [xvi.] is impossible. Hence 
must be equal to , and the same as in ,  is equal
to , and the angle  is equal to the angle .

This Proposition, together with iv. and viii., includes all the
cases of the congruence of two triangles. Part I. may be proved
immediately by superposition. For it is evident if  be applied
to , so that the point  shall coincide with , and the line
 with , since  is equal to , the point  shall coincide
with ; and since the angles ,  are respectively equal to the
angles , , the lines ,  shall coincide with  and .
Hence the triangles are congruent.
footnotesize

Def.-If every point on a geometrical figure satisfies an
assigned condition, that figure is called the locus of the
point satisfying the condition. Thus, for example, a
circle is the locus of a point whose distance from the
centre is equal to its radius.


Exercises.


1. The extremities of the base of an isosceles triangle are equally
distant from any point in the perpendicular from the vertical angle
on the base.

2. If the line which bisects the vertical angle of a triangle also
bisects the base, the triangle is isosceles.

3. The locus of a point which is equally distant from two fixed
lines is the pair of lines which bisect the angles made by the
fixed lines.

4. In a given right line find a point such that the perpendiculars
from it on two given lines may be equal. State also the number
of solutions.

5. If two right-angled triangles have equal hypotenuses, and
an acute angle of one equal to an acute angle of the other, they
are congruent.

6. If two right-angled triangles have equal hypotenuses, and
a side of one equal to a side of the other, they are congruent.

7. The bisectors of the three internal angles of a triangle are
concurrent.

8. The bisectors of two external angles and the bisector of the
third internal angle are concurrent.

9. Through a given point draw a right line, such that perpendiculars
on it from two given points on opposite sides may be
equal to each other.

10. Through a given point draw a right line intersecting two
given lines, and forming an isosceles triangle with them.
footnotesize


Parallel Lines.
Def. i.-If two right lines in the same plane be such
that, when produced indefinitely, they do not meet at any
finite distance, they are said to be parallel.

Def. ii.-A parallelogram is a quadrilateral, both
pairs of whose opposite sides are parallel.


Def. iii.-The right line joining either pair of opposite
angles of a quadrilateral is called a diagonal.

Def. iv.-If both pairs of opposite sides of a quadrilateral
be produced to meet, the right line joining their
points of intersection is called its third diagonal.

Def. v.-A quadrilateral which has one pair of opposite
sides parallel is called a trapezium.

1108f046

Def. vi.-If from the extremities of one right line
perpendiculars be drawn to another, the intercept between
their feet is called the projection of the first line
on the second.

Def. vii.-When a right line
intersects two other right lines
in two distinct points it makes
with them eight angles, which
have received special names in
relation to one another. Thus,
in the figure-1, 2; 7, 8 are
called exterior angles; 3, 4; 5, 6, interior angles.
Again, 4; 6; 3, 5 are called alternate angles; lastly,
1, 5; 2, 6; 3, 8; 4, 7 are called corresponding angles.

PROP. XXVII.-Theorem.If a right line  intersecting two right lines  makes the alternate angles  equal to
each other, these lines are parallel.

1607f047

Dem.-If  and  are not parallel they must meet,
if produced, at some finite
distance: if possible let
them meet in ; then
the figure  is a triangle,
and the angle 
is an exterior angle, and
 a non-adjacent interior
angle. Hence [xvi.]  is greater than ;
but it is also equal to it (hyp.), that is, both equal and
greater, which is absurd. Hence  and  are
parallel.

Or thus: Bisect  in ; turn the whole figure
round  as a centre, so that  shall fall on itself;
then because , the point  shall fall on ;
and because the angle  is equal to the angle ,
the line  will occupy the place of , and the line
 the place of ; therefore the lines ,  interchange
places, and the figure is symmetrical with respect
to the point . Hence, if ,  meet on one
side of , they must also meet on the other side; but
two right lines cannot enclose a space (Axiom x.);
therefore they do not meet at either side. Hence they
are parallel.


PROP. XXVIII.-Theorem.If a right line  intersecting two right lines 
makes the exterior angle  equal to its corresponding
interior angle , or makes two interior
angles  on the same side equal to two right
angles, the two right lines are parallel.

1338f048

Dem.-1. Since the lines ,  intersect, the
angle  is equal to 
[xv.]; but  is equal to
 (hyp.); therefore 
is equal to , and they
are alternate angles. Hence
[xxvii.]  is parallel to
.

2. Since  and 
are adjacent angles, their sum is equal to two right
angles [xiii.]; but the sum of  and  is two
right angles (hyp.); therefore rejecting the angle 
we have  equal , and they are alternate
angles; therefore  is parallel to  [xxvii.].



PROP. XXIX.-Theorem.If a right line  intersect two parallel right lines
, it makes-. the alternate angles 
equal to one another; . the exterior angle  equal
to the corresponding interior angle ; . the two
interior angles  on the same side equal to
two right angles.

1358f049

Dem.-If the angle  be not equal to , one
must be greater than the
other. Let  be the
greater; to each add ,
and we have the sum of the
angles ,  greater
than the sum of the angles
, ; but the sum of
,  is two right
angles; therefore the sum of ,  is less than
two right angles, and therefore (Axiom xii.) the lines
, , if produced, will meet at some finite distance:
but since they are parallel (hyp.) they cannot meet at
any finite distance. Hence the angle  is not unequal
to -that is, it is equal to it.

2. Since the angle  is equal to  [xv.], and
 is equal to  (1),  is equal to 
(Axiom i.).

3. Since  is equal to  (1), add  to each,
and we have the sum of the angles ,  equal
to the sum of the angles , ; but the sum of the
angles ,  [xiii.] is two right angles; therefore
the sum of the angles ,  is two right angles.

Exercises.


1. Demonstrate both parts of Prop. xxviii. without using Prop.
xxvii.

2. The parts of all perpendiculars to two parallel lines intercepted
between them are equal.

3. If ,  be adjacent angles, any parallel to  will
meet the bisectors of these angles in points equally distant from
where it meets .


4. If through the middle point  of any right line terminated
by two parallel right lines any other secant be drawn, the intercept
on this line made by the parallels is bisected in .

5. Two right lines passing through a point equidistant from
two parallels intercept equal portions on the parallels.

6. The perimeter of the parallelogram, formed by drawing
parallels to two sides of an equilateral triangle from any point in
the third side, is equal to twice the side.

7. If the opposite sides of a hexagon be equal and parallel, its
diagonals are concurrent.

8. If two intersecting right lines be respectively parallel to two
others, the angle between the former is equal to the angle between
the latter. For if ,  be respectively parallel to ,
, and if ,  meet in , the angles ,  are each equal to
 [xxix.].
footnotesize


PROP. XXX.-Theorem.If two right lines  be parallel to the same right
line , they are parallel to one another.

1257f050

Dem.-Draw any secant
. Then since  and
 are parallel, the angle 
is equal to  [xxix.]. In like
manner the angle  is equal
to  [xxix.]. Therefore the
angle  is equal to the
angle  (Axiom i.). Hence 
[xxvii.]  is parallel to .


PROP. XXXI.-Problem.Through a given point  to draw a right line parallel
to a given right line.

1255f051

Sol.-Take any point  in
. Join  (Post. i.), and
make the angle  equal to
the angle  [xxiii.]. The
line  is parallel to 
[xxvii.].

Exercises.


1. Given the altitude of a triangle and the base angles, construct
it.

2. From a given point draw to a given line a line making with
it an angle equal to a given angle. Show that there will be two
solutions.

3. Prove the following construction for trisecting a given line
:-On  describe an equilateral . Bisect the angles
,  by the lines , , meeting in ; through  draw
parallels to , , meeting  in , : ,  are the points of
trisection of .

4. Inscribe a square in a given equilateral triangle, having its
base on a given side of the triangle.

5. Draw a line parallel to the base of a triangle so that it may
be-1. equal to the intercept it makes on one of the sides from
the extremity of the base; 2. equal to the sum of the two intercepts
on the sides from the extremities of the base; 3. equal to
their difference. Show that there are two solutions in each case.

6. Through two given points in two parallel lines draw two
lines forming a lozenge with the given parallels.

7. Between two lines given in position place a line of given
length which shall be parallel to a given line. Show that there
are two solutions.
footnotesize

PROP. XXXII.-Theorem.If any side  of a triangle  be produced to
, the external angle  is equal to the sum of the
two internal non-adjacent angles , and the sum of
the three internal angles is equal to two right angles.1409f052

Dem.-Draw  parallel to  [xxxi.]. Now since
 intersects the parallels ,
, the alternate angles ,
 are equal [xxix.]. Again,
since  intersects the parallels
, , the angle  is
equal to  [xxix.]; hence
the whole angle  is equal
to the sum of the two angles
, : to each of these add the angle  and
we have the sum of ,  equal to the sum of the
three angles , , : but the sum of ,
 is two right angles [xiii.]; hence the sum of the
three angles , ,  is two right angles.

Cor. 1.-If a right-angled triangle be isosceles, each
base angle is half a right angle.

Cor. 2.-If two triangles have two angles in one
respectively equal to two angles in the other, their
remaining angles are equal.

Cor. 3.-Since a quadrilateral can be divided into
two triangles, the sum of its angles is equal to four
right angles.

Cor. 4.-If a figure of  sides be divided into triangles
by drawing diagonals from any one of its angles
there will be  triangles; hence the sum of its
angles is equal  right angles.

Cor. 5.-If all the sides of any convex polygon be
produced, the sum of the external angles is equal to
four right angles.

Cor. 6.-Each angle of an equilateral triangle is
two-thirds of a right angle.

Cor. 7.-If one angle of a triangle be equal to the
sum of the other two, it is a right angle.

Cor. 8.-Every right-angled triangle can be divided
into two isosceles triangles by a line drawn from the
right angle to the hypotenuse.


Exercises.


1. Trisect a right angle.

2. Any angle of a triangle is obtuse, right, or acute, according
as the opposite side is greater than, equal to, or less than, twice
the median drawn from that angle.

3. If the sides of a polygon of  sides be produced, the sum of
the angles between each alternate pair is equal to  right
angles.

4. If the line which bisects the external vertical angle be
parallel to the base, the triangle is isosceles.

5. If two right-angled s ,  be on the same hypotenuse
, and the vertices  and  be joined, the pair of angles
subtended by any side of the quadrilateral thus formed are equal.

6. The three perpendiculars of a triangle are concurrent.


7. The bisectors of two adjacent angles of a parallelogram are
at right angles.

8. The bisectors of the external angles of a quadrilateral form a
circumscribed quadrilateral, the sum of whose opposite angles is
equal to two right angles.

9. If the three sides of one triangle be respectively perpendicular
to those of another triangle, the triangles are equiangular.

10. Construct a right-angled triangle, being given the hypotenuse
and the sum or difference of the sides.

11. The angles made with the base of an isosceles triangle by
perpendiculars from its extremities on the equal sides are each
equal to half the vertical angle.

12. The angle included between the internal bisector of one
base angle of a triangle and the external bisector of the other base
angle is equal to half the vertical angle.

13. In the construction of Prop. xviii. prove that the angle
 is equal to half the difference of the base angles.

14. If , ,  denote the angles of a , prove that ,
,  will be the angles of a  formed by any
side and the bisectors of the external angles between that side and
the other sides produced.
footnotesize


PROP. XXXIII.-Theorem.The right lines  which join the adjacent extremities
of two equal and parallel right lines  are equal and parallel.

1339f053

Dem.-Join . Now since  is parallel to ,
and  intersects them, the
angle  is equal to the
alternate angle  [xxix.].
Again, since  is equal to
, and  common, the triangles
,  have the
sides ,  in one respectively
equal to the sides ,
 in the other, and the angles ,  contained
by those sides equal; therefore [iv.] the base  is
equal to the base , and the angle  is equal to
the angle ; but these are alternate angles; hence
[xxvii.]  is parallel to , and it has been proved
equal to it. Therefore  is both equal and parallel to .


Exercises.


1. If two right lines ,  be respectively equal and parallel
to two other right lines , , the right line  joining the
extremities of the former pair is equal to the right line  joining
the extremities of the latter.

2. Right lines that are equal and parallel have equal projections
on any other right line; and conversely, parallel right lines that
have equal projections on another right line are equal.

3. Equal right lines that have equal projections on another
right line are parallel.

4. The right lines which join transversely the extremities of
two equal and parallel right lines bisect each other.
footnotesize


PROP. XXXIV.-Theorem.The opposite sides  and the opposite
angles   of a parallelogram are equal to
one another, and either diagonal bisects the parallelogram.

1338f054

Dem.-Join . Since  is parallel to , and
 intersects them, the angle
 is equal to the angle
 [xxix.]. Again, since
 intersects the parallels ,
, the angle  is equal to
the angle ; hence the triangles
,  have the two
angles ,  in one respectively
equal to the two angles ,  in the other,
and the side  common. Therefore [xxvi.]  is equal
to , and  to ; the angle  to the angle ,
and the triangle  to the triangle .

Again, because the angle  is equal to , and
 equal to , the whole angle  is equal to the
whole angle .

Cor. 1.-If one angle of a parallelogram be a right
angle, all its angles are right angles.

Cor. 2.-If two adjacent sides of a parallelogram be
equal, it is a lozenge.


Cor. 3.-If both pairs of opposite sides of a quadrilateral
be equal, it is a parallelogram.

Cor. 4.-If both pairs of opposite angles of a quadrilateral
be equal, it is a parallelogram.

Cor. 5.-If the diagonals of a quadrilateral bisect
each other, it is a parallelogram.

Cor. 6.-If both diagonals of a quadrilateral bisect
the quadrilateral, it is a parallelogram.

Cor. 7.-If the adjacent sides of a parallelogram be
equal, its diagonals bisect its angles.

Cor. 8.-If the adjacent sides of a parallelogram be
equal, its diagonals intersect at right angles.

Cor. 9.-In a right-angled parallelogram the diagonals
are equal.

Cor. 10.-If the diagonals of a parallelogram be perpendicular
to each other, it is a lozenge.

Cor. 11.-If a diagonal of a parallelogram bisect the
angles whose vertices it joins, the parallelogram is a
lozenge.

Exercises.


1. The diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other.

2. If the diagonals of a parallelogram be equal, all its angles
are right angles.

3. Divide a right line into any number of equal parts.

4. The right lines joining the adjacent extremities of two
unequal parallel right lines will meet, if produced, on the side
of the shorter parallel.

5. If two opposite sides of a quadrilateral be parallel but not
equal, and the other pair equal but not parallel, its opposite angles
are supplemental.

6. Construct a triangle, being given the middle points of its
three sides.

7. The area of a quadrilateral is equal to the area of a triangle,
having two sides equal to its diagonals, and the contained angle
equal to that between the diagonals.
footnotesize


PROP. XXXV.-Theorem.Parallelograms on the same base  and between the
same parallels are equal.

1758f055

Dem.-1. Let the sides ,  of the parallelograms
,  opposite to the
common base  terminate
in the same
point , then [xxxiv.]
each parallelogram is
double of the triangle
. Hence they are
equal to one another.

2. Let the sides ,  (figures (), ()) opposite
to  not terminate in the same point.

338f056

Then because  is a parallelogram,  is equal
to  [xxxiv.]; and since  is a parallelogram, 
is equal to ; therefore (see fig. ()) take away ,
and in fig. () add , and we have in each case 
equal to , and  is equal to  [xxxiv.]. Hence
the triangles ,  have the two sides ,  in
one respectively equal to the two sides ,  in the
other, and the angle  [xxix.] equal to the angle
; hence [iv.] the triangle  is equal to the triangle
; and taking each of these triangles in succession
from the quadrilateral , there will remain
the parallelogram  equal to the parallelogram .

Or thus: The triangles ,  have [xxxiv.]
the sides ,  in one respectively equal to the sides
,  in the other, and the angle  equal to the
angle  [xxix., Ex. 8]. Hence the triangle  is
equal to the triangle ; and, taking each away from
the quadrilateral , there will remain the parallelogram
 equal to the parallelogram .

Observation.-By the second method of proof the subdivision
of the demonstration into cases is avoided. It is easy to see that
either of the two parallelograms ,  can be divided
into parts and rearranged so as to make it congruent with the
other. This Proposition affords the first instance in the Elements
in which equality which is not congruence occurs. This equality
is expressed algebraically by the symbol , while congruence
is denoted by , called also the symbol of identity. Figures that
are congruent are said to be identically equal.
footnotesize

PROP. XXXVI.-Theorem.Parallelograms  on equal bases  and
between the same parallels are equal.

1908f057

Dem.-Join , . Now since  is a parallelogram,
 is equal
to  [xxxiv.]; but
 is equal to 
(hyp.); therefore
 is equal to 
(Axiom i.). Hence
, , which join
their adjacent extremities,
are equal and parallel; therefore  is a
parallelogram. Again, since the parallelograms ,
 are on the same base , and between the same
parallels , , they are equal [xxxv.]. In like
manner, since the parallelograms ,  are on the
same base , and between the same parallels ,
, they are equal. Hence  and  are each equal
to . Therefore (Axiom i.)  is equal to .


Exercise.-Prove this Proposition without joining , .
footnotesize


PROP. XXXVII.-Theorem.Triangles  on the same base  and between
the same parallels  are equal.

1908f058

Dem.-Produce  both ways. Draw  parallel
to , and  parallel
to  [xxxi.]
Then the figures
,  are
parallelograms; and
since they are on
the same base ,
and between the
same parallels ,  they are equal [xxxv.]. Again,
the triangle  is half the parallelogram 
[xxxiv.], because the diagonal  bisects it. In like
manner the triangle  is half the parallelogram
, because the diagonal DC bisects it, and halves
of equal things are equal (Axiom vii.). Therefore the
triangle  is equal to the triangle .

Exercises.


1. If two equal triangles be on the same base, but on opposite
sides, the right line joining their vertices is bisected by the base.

2. Construct a triangle equal in area to a given quadrilateral
figure.

3. Construct a triangle equal in area to a given rectilineal
figure.

4. Construct a lozenge equal to a given parallelogram, and
having a given side of the parallelogram for base.

5. Given the base and the area of a triangle, find the locus of
the vertex.

6. If through a point , in the production of the diagonal 
of a parallelogram , any right line be drawn cutting the
sides ,  in the points , , and ,  be joined, the
triangle  is less than half the parallelogram.
footnotesize


PROP. XXXVIII.-Theorem.Two triangles on equal bases and between the same
parallels are equal.

Dem.-By a construction similar to the last, we see
that the triangles are the halves of parallelograms, on
equal bases, and between the same parallels. Hence
they are the halves of equal parallelograms [xxxvi.].
Therefore they are equal to one another.

Exercises.


1. Every median of a triangle bisects the triangle.

2. If two triangles have two sides of one respectively equal to
two sides of the other, and the contained angles supplemental,
their areas are equal.

3. If the base of a triangle be divided into any number of equal
parts, right lines drawn from the vertex to the points of division
will divide the whole triangle into as many equal parts.

4. Right lines from any point in the diagonal of a parallelogram
to the angular points through which the diagonal does not
pass, and the diagonal, divide the parallelogram into four triangles
which are equal, two by two.

5. If one diagonal of a quadrilateral bisects the other, it also
bisects the quadrilateral, and conversely.

6. If two s ,  be on the same base , and between
the same parallels, and if a parallel to  meet the sides , 
in the point , ; and the sides ,  in the point , ; then
.

7. If instead of triangles on the same base we have triangles on
equal bases and between the same parallels, the intercepts made by
the sides of the triangles on any parallel to the bases are equal.

8. If the middle points of any two sides of a triangle be joined,
the triangle so formed with the two half sides is one-fourth of the
whole.

9. The triangle whose vertices are the middle points of two
sides, and any point in the base of another triangle, is one-fourth
of that triangle.

10. Bisect a given triangle by a right line drawn from a given
point in one of the sides.

11. Trisect a given triangle by three right lines drawn from a
given point within it.


12. Prove that any right line through the intersection of the
diagonals of a parallelogram bisects the parallelogram.

13. The triangle formed by joining the middle point of one of
the non-parallel sides of a trapezium to the extremities of the
opposite side is equal to half the trapezium.
footnotesize


PROP. XXXIX.-Theorem.Equal triangles  on the same base  and
on the same side of it are between the same parallels.

1288f059

Dem.-Join . Then if  be not parallel to ,
let  be parallel to it, and
let it cut  in . Join .
Now since the triangles ,
 are on the same base ,
and between the same parallels
, , they are equal [xxxvii.];
but the triangle  is equal
to the triangle  (hyp.).
Therefore (Axiom i.) the triangle  is equal to
the triangle -that is, a part equal to the whole
which is absurd. Hence  must be parallel to .


PROP. XL.-Theorem.Equal triangles  on equal bases 
which form parts of the same right line, and on the same
side of the line, are between the same parallels.

1707f060

Dem.-Join . If  be not parallel to , let
 be parallel to it.
Join . Now since
the triangles  and
 are on equal bases
, , and between
the same parallels ,
, they are equal
[xxxviii.]; but the triangle
 is equal to the triangle  (hyp.). Hence
 is equal to  (Axiom i.)-that is, a part equal
to the whole, which is absurd. Therefore  must be
parallel to .
Def.-The altitude of a triangle is the perpendicular
from the vertex on the base.


Exercises.


1. Triangles and parallelograms of equal bases and altitudes
are respectively equal.

2. The right line joining the middle points of two sides of a
triangle is parallel to the third; for the medians from the extremities
of the base to these points will each bisect the original
triangle. Hence the two triangles whose base is the third side
and whose vertices are the points of bisection are equal.

3. The parallel to any side of a triangle through the middle
point of another bisects the third.

4. The lines of connexion of the middle points of the sides of
a triangle divide it into four congruent triangles.

5. The line of connexion of the middle points of two sides of
a triangle is equal to half the third side.

6. The middle points of the four sides of a convex quadrilateral,
taken in order, are the angular points of a parallelogram whose
area is equal to half the area of the quadrilateral.

7. The sum of the two parallel sides of a trapezium is double
the line joining the middle points of the two remaining sides.

8. The parallelogram formed by the line of connexion of the
middle points of two sides of a triangle, and any pair of parallels
drawn through the same points to meet the third side, is equal to
half the triangle.

9. The right line joining the middle points of opposite sides
of a quadrilateral, and the right line joining the middle points
of its diagonals, are concurrent.
footnotesize


PROP. XLI.-Theorem.If a parallelogram  and a triangle  be
on the same base  and between the same parallels, the
parallelogram is double of the triangle.

1288f061

Dem.-Join . The parallelogram  is double
of the triangle  [xxxiv.];
but the triangle  is equal
to the triangle  [xxxvii.].
Therefore the parallelogram
 is double of the triangle
.

Cor. 1.-If a triangle and
a parallelogram have equal altitudes, and if the base
of the triangle be double of the base of the parallelogram,
the areas are equal.

Cor. 2.-The sum of the triangles whose bases are
two opposite sides of a parallelogram, and which have
any point between these sides as a common vertex, is
equal to half the parallelogram.


PROP. XLII.-Problem.To construct a parallelogram equal to a given triangle
, and having an angle equal to a given angle .

224f062

Sol.-Bisect  in . Join . Make the angle
 [xxiii.] equal to . Draw  parallel to 
[xxxi.], and  parallel to .  is a parallelogram
fulfilling the required conditions.


Dem.-Because  is equal to  (const.), the triangle
 is equal to the triangle  [xxxviii.],
therefore the triangle  is double of the triangle
; but the parallelogram  is also double of the
triangle  [xli.], because they are on the same base
, and between the same parallels  and .
Therefore the parallelogram  is equal to the triangle
, and it has (const.) the angle  equal to .
Hence  is a parallelogram fulfilling the required conditions.


PROP. XLIII.-Theorem.
The parallels  through any point  in one
of the diagonals  of a parallelogram divide it into
four parallelograms, of which the two  through
which the diagonal does not pass, and which are called the
complements of the other two, are equal.1408f063

Dem.-Because the diagonal bisects the parallelograms
, ,  we have
[xxxiv.] the triangle 
equal to the triangle ,
the triangle  equal to
, and the triangle 
equal to the triangle .
Hence, subtracting the sums
of the two last equalities from
the first, we get the parallelogram  equal to the
parallelogram .

Cor. 1.-If through a point  within a parallelogram
 lines drawn parallel to the sides make
the parallelograms ,  equal,  is a point in the
diagonal .

Cor. 2.-The parallelogram  is equal to , and
 to .


Cor. 2. supplies an easy demonstration of a fundamental Proposition
in Statics.
footnotesize


Exercises.

17013f064


1. If ,  be parallels to the adjacent sides of a parallelogram
, the diagonals
,  of two of
the four s into which
they divide it and one of
the diagonals of 
are concurrent.

Dem.-Let , 
meet in ; through 
draw ,  parallel to
, . Produce ,
,  to meet ,
and , ,  to meet
. Now the complement : to each add the ,
and we get the figure . Again, the complement
 [xliii.]: to each add the , and we get the . Hence the . Therefore they are
about the same diagonal [xliii., Cor. 1]. Hence  produced
will pass through .

2. The middle points of the three diagonals , ,  of
a quadrilateral  are
collinear.

158f065

Dem.-Complete the
. Draw , 
parallel to , . Join
, and produce; then ,
,  are concurrent
(Ex. 1); therefore  will
pass through . Join ,
. Now [xi., Ex. 2, 3]
the middle points of ,
,  are collinear, but
[xxxiv., Ex. 1] the middle
points of ,  are the
middle points of , .
Hence the middle points of , ,  are collinear.
footnotesize


PROP. XLIV.-Problem.To a given, right line  to apply a parallelogram
which shall be equal to a given triangle , and have one
of its angles equal to a given angle .

240f066

Sol.-Construct the parallelogram  [xlii.] equal
to the given triangle , and having the angle  equal
to the given angle , and so that its side  shall be in
the same right line with . Through  draw 
parallel to  [xxxi.], and produce  to meet it in .
Join . Then because  and  are parallels, and
 intersects them, the sum of the angles , 
is two right angles [xxix.]; therefore the sum of the
angles ,  is less than two right angles; and
therefore (Axiom xii.) the lines , , if produced,
will meet as at . Through  draw  parallel to
 [xxxi.], and produce  and  to meet it in the
points  and . Then  is a parallelogram fulfilling
the required conditions.

Dem.-The parallelogram  is equal to 
[xliii.]; but  is equal to the triangle  (const.);
therefore  is equal to the triangle . Again, the
angle  is equal to  [xv.], and  is equal
to  (const.); therefore the angle  is equal to ;
and  is constructed on the given line; therefore it is
the parallelogram required.



PROP. XLV.-Problem.To construct a parallelogram equal to a given rectilineal
figure , and having an angle equal to a given rectilineal angle .

230f067

Sol.-Join . Construct a parallelogram 
[xlii.] equal to the triangle , and having the
angle  equal to the given angle ; and to the right
line  apply the parallelogram  equal to the triangle
, and having the angle  equal to 
[xliv.], and so on for additional triangles if there be
any. Then  is a parallelogram fulfilling the required
conditions.

Dem.-Because the angles ,  are each
equal to  (const.), they are equal to one another: to
each add the angle , and we have the sum of the
angles ,  equal to the sum of the angles
, ; but since  is parallel to , and 
intersects them, the sum of ,  is two right
angles [xxix.]. Hence the sum of ,  is two
right angles; therefore ,  are in the same right
line [xiv.].

Again, because  intersects the parallels , ,
the alternate angles ,  are equal [xxix.]: to
each add the angle , and we have the sum of the
angles ,  equal to the sum of the angles ,
; but since  is parallel to , and  intersects
them, the sum of the angles ,  is equal
to two right angles [xxix.]. Hence the sum of the
angles ,  is two right angles; therefore 
and  are in the same right line [xiv.].

Again, because  and  are parallelograms, 
and  are each parallel to ; hence [xxx.]  is
parallel to , and the opposite sides  and  are
parallel; therefore  is a parallelogram; and because
the parallelogram  (const.) is equal to the triangle
, and  to the triangle , the whole parallelogram
 is equal to the rectilineal figure , and
it has the angle  equal to the given angle . Hence
 is a parallelogram fulfilling the required conditions.

It would simplify Problems xliv., xlv., if they were stated as
the constructing of rectangles, and in this special form they
would be better understood by the student, since rectangles are
the simplest areas to which others are referred.
footnotesize


Exercises.


1. Construct a rectangle equal to the sum of two or any
number of rectilineal figures.

2. Construct a rectangle equal to the difference of two given
figures.
footnotesize


PROP. XLVI.-Problem.On a given right line  to describe a square.

909f255

Sol.-Erect  at right angles to  [xi.], and
make it equal to  [iii.]. Through
 draw  parallel to  [xxxi.],
and through  draw  parallel to
; then  is the square required.

Dem.-Because  is a parallelogram,
 is equal to  [xxxiv.];
but  is equal to  (const.); therefore
 is equal to , and  is
equal to  [xxxiv.]. Hence the four sides are equal;
therefore  is a lozenge, and the angle  is a right
angle. Therefore  is a square (Def. xxx.).



Exercises.

)
1. The squares on equal lines are equal; and, conversely, the
sides of equal squares are equal.

2. The parallelograms about the diagonal of a square are
squares.

3. If on the four sides of a square, or on the sides produced,
points be taken equidistant from the four angles, they will be the
angular points of another square, and similarly for a regular
pentagon, hexagon, c.

4. Divide a given square into five equal parts; namely, four
right-angled triangles, and a square.
footnotesize)


PROP. XLVII.-Theorem.)In a right-angled triangle  the square on the
hypotenuse  is equal to the sum of the squares on the other two sides .)

175)15)f068)

Dem.)-On the sides , ,  describe squares
[xlvi).]. Draw  parallel
to . Join ,
. Then because the
angle  is right
(hyp.), and  is
right, being the angle
of a square, the sum of
the angles , 
is two right angles;
therefore ,  are
in the same right line
[xiv).]. In like manner
,  are in the
same right line. Again,
because  is the
angle of a square it is a right angle: in like manner
 is a right angle. Hence  is equal to :
to each add , and we get the angle  equal to
. Again, since  and  are squares,  is
equal to , and  to . Hence the two triangles
,  have the sides ,  in one respectively
equal to the sides ,  in the other, and the contained
angles ,  also equal. Therefore [iv).]
the triangles are equal; but the parallelogram  is
double of the triangle  [xli).], because they are on
the same base , and between the same parallels 
and . In like manner the parallelogram
 is double
of the triangle , because they are on the same base
, and between the same parallels  and ; and
since doubles of equal things are equal (Axiom vi).),
the parallelogram  is equal to . In like manner
it can be proved that the parallelogram  is equal to
. Hence the whole square  is equal to the sum of
the two squares  and .)
115)15)f069)



Or thus: Let all the squares be made in reversed directions.
Join , , and through  draw 
parallel to . Now, taking the 
from the right s , , the remaining
s ,  are equal.
Hence the s ,  have the side
, and , and the
; therefore [iv.] they are
equal; and since [xli.] the s , 
are respectively the doubles of these
triangles, they are equal. In like manner
the s  ,  are equal; hence
the whole square  is equal to the
sum of the two squares , .

This proof is shorter than the usual
one, since it is not necessary to prove
that ,  are in one right line. In a similar way the
Proposition may be proved by taking any of the eight figures
formed by turning the squares in all possible directions. Another
simplification of the proof would be got by considering that the
point  is such that one of the s ,  can be turned
round it in its own plane until it coincides with the other; and
hence that they are congruent.
footnotesize



Exercises.


1. The square on  is equal to the rectangle , and
the square on .

2. The square on .

3. .

4. Find a line whose square shall be equal to the sum of two
given squares.

5. Given the base of a triangle and the difference of the
squares of its sides, the locus of its vertex is a right line perpendicular
to the base.

6. The transverse lines ,  are perpendicular to each
other.

7. If  be joined, its square is equal to .

8. The square described on the sum of the sides of a right-angled
triangle exceeds the square on the hypotenuse by four
times the area of the triangle (see fig., xlvi., Ex. 3).  More
generally, if the vertical angle of a triangle be equal to the angle
of a regular polygon of  sides, then the regular polygon of
 sides, described on a line equal to the sum of its sides, exceeds
the area of the regular polygon of  sides described on the base
by  times the area of the triangle.

9. If  and  intersect in , and through  a line be drawn
parallel to , meeting  in ; then  is equal to .

10. Each of the triangles  and , formed by joining
adjacent corners of the squares, is equal to the right-angled triangle
.

11. Find a line whose square shall be equal to the difference
of the squares on two lines.

12. The square on the difference of the sides ,  is less
than the square on the hypotenuse by four times the area of the
triangle.

13. If  be joined, the lines , , , are concurrent.

14. In an equilateral triangle, three times the square on any
side is equal to four times the square on the perpendicular to it
from the opposite vertex.

15. On , a part of the side  of a square , is
described the square , having its side  in the continuation
of ; it is required to divide the figure  into
three parts which will form a square.

16. Four times the sum of the squares on the medians which
bisect the sides of a right-angled triangle is equal to five times
the square on the hypotenuse.

17. If perpendiculars be let fall on the sides of a polygon from
any point, dividing each side into two segments, the sum of the
squares on one set of alternate segments is equal to the sum of the
squares on the remaining set.

18. The sum of the squares on lines drawn from any point to
one pair of opposite angles of a rectangle is equal to the sum of
the squares on the lines from the same point to the remaining
pair.

19. Divide the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle into two
parts, such that the difference between their squares shall be
equal to the square on one of the sides.

20. From the extremities of the base of a triangle perpendiculars
are let fall on the opposite sides; prove that the sum of the
rectangles contained by the sides and their lower segments is
equal to the square on the base.
footnotesize


PROP. XLVIII.-Theorem.If the square on one side  of a triangle be equal to
the sum of the squares on the remaining sides ,
the angle  opposite to that side is a right angle.

1079f070

Dem.-Erect  at right angles to  [xi.], and
make  equal to  [iii.]. Join
. Then because  is equal
to , the square on  is equal
to the square on : to each add
the square on , and we have the
sum of the squares on , 
equal to the sum of the squares
on , ; but the sum of the
squares on ,  is equal to the
square on  (hyp.), and the sum of the squares on
,  is equal to the square on  [xlvii.]. Therefore
the square on  is equal to the square on .
Hence  is equal to  [xlvi., Ex. 1]. Again, because
 is equal to  (const.), and  common to
the two triangles , , and the base  equal
to the base , the angle  is equal to the angle
; but the angle  is a right angle (const.).
Hence the angle  is a right angle.

1257f071


The foregoing proof forms an exception to Euclid's demonstrations
of converse propositions, for it
is direct. The following is an indirect
proof:-If  be not at right
angles to , let  be perpendicular
to it. Make . Join .
Then, as before, it can be proved
that  is equal to , and  is
equal to  (const.). This is contrary
to Prop. vii. Hence the angle  is a right angle.
footnotesize

Questions for Examination on Book I.


1. What is Geometry?

2. What is geometric magnitude? Ans. That which has extension
in space.

3. Name the primary concepts of geometry. Ans. Points,
lines, surfaces, and solids.

4. How may lines be divided? Ans. Into straight and curved.

5. How is a straight line generated? Ans. By the motion of
a point which has the same direction throughout.

6. How is a curved line generated? Ans. By the motion of a
point which continually changes its direction.

7. How may surfaces be divided? Ans. Into planes and
curved surfaces.

8. How may a plane surface be generated. Ans. By the
motion of a right line which crosses another right line, and
moves along it without changing its direction.

9. Why has a point no dimensions?

10. Why has a line neither breadth nor thickness?

11. How many dimensions has a surface?

12. What is Plane Geometry?

13. What portion of plane geometry forms the subject of the
"First Six Books of Euclid's Elements"? Ans. The geometry
of the point, line, and circle.

14. What is the subject-matter of Book I.?

15. How many conditions are necessary to fix the position of a
point in a plane? Ans. Two; for it must be the intersection of
two lines, straight or curved.

16. Give examples taken from Book I.

17. In order to construct a line, how many conditions must be
given? Ans. Two; as, for instance, two points through which
it must pass; or one point through which it must pass and a line
to which it must be parallel or perpendicular, c.

18. What problems on the drawing of lines occur in Book I.?
Ans. ii., ix., xi., xii., xxiii., xxxi., in each of which, except
Problem 2, there are two conditions. The direction in
Problem 2 is indeterminate.

19. How many conditions are required in order to describe a
circle? Ans. Three; as, for instance, the position of the centre
(which depends on two conditions) and the length of the radius
(compare Post. iii.).

20. How is a proposition proved indirectly? Ans. By proving
that its contradictory is false.

21. What is meant by the obverse of a proposition?

22. What propositions in Book I. are the obverse respectively
of Propositions iv., v., vi., xxvii.?

23. What proposition is an instance of the rule of identity?

24. What are congruent figures?

25. What other name is applied to them? Ans. They are
said to be identically equal.

26. Mention all the instances of equality which are not
congruence that occur in Book I.

27. What is the difference between the symbols denoting
congruence and identity?

28. Classify the properties of triangles and parallelograms
proved in Book I.

29. What proposition is the converse of Prop. xxvi., Part I.?

30. Define adjacent, exterior, interior, alternate angles
respectively.

31. What is meant by the projection of one line on another?

32. What are meant by the medians of a triangle?

33. What is meant by the third diagonal of a quadrilateral?

34. Mention some propositions in Book I. which are particular
cases of more general ones that follow.

35. What is the sum of all the exterior angles of any
rectilineal figure equal to?

36. How many conditions must be given in order to construct
a triangle? Ans. Three; such as the three sides, or two sides
and an angle, c.
footnotesize

Exercises on Book I.


1. Any triangle is equal to the fourth part of that which is
formed by drawing through each vertex a line parallel to its
opposite side.

2. The three perpendiculars of the first triangle in question 1
are the perpendiculars at the middle points of the sides of the
second triangle.

3. Through a given point draw a line so that the portion
intercepted by the legs of a given angle may be bisected in the point.

4. The three medians of a triangle are concurrent.

5. The medians of a triangle divide each other in the ratio of
.

6. Construct a triangle, being given two sides and the median
of the third side.

7. In every triangle the sum of the medians is less than the
perimeter, and greater than three-fourths of the perimeter.

8. Construct a triangle, being given a side and the two
medians of the remaining sides.

9. Construct a triangle, being given the three medians.

10. The angle included between the perpendicular from the
vertical angle of a triangle on the base, and the bisector of the
vertical angle, is equal to half the difference of the base angles.

11. Find in two parallels two points which shall be equidistant
from a given point, and whose line of connexion shall be parallel
to a given line.

12. Construct a parallelogram, being given two diagonals and
a side.

13. The smallest median of a triangle corresponds to the
greatest side.

14. Find in two parallels two points subtending a right angle
at a given point and equally distant from it.

15. The sum of the distances of any point in the base of an
isosceles triangle from the equal sides is equal to the distance of
either extremity of the base from the opposite side.

16. The three perpendiculars at the middle points of the sides
of a triangle are concurrent. Hence prove that perpendiculars
from the vertices on the opposite sides are concurrent [see
Ex. 2].

17. Inscribe a lozenge in a triangle having for an angle one
angle of the triangle.

18. Inscribe a square in a triangle having its base on a side of
the triangle.

19. Find the locus of a point, the sum or the difference of
whose distance from two fixed lines is equal to a given length.

20. The sum of the perpendiculars from any point in the
interior of an equilateral triangle is equal to the perpendicular from
any vertex on the opposite side.

21. The distance of the foot of the perpendicular from either
extremity of the base of a triangle on the bisector of the vertical
angle, from the middle point of the base, is equal to half the
difference of the sides.

22. In the same case, if the bisector of the external vertical
angle be taken, the distance will be equal to half the sum of the
sides.

23. Find a point in one of the sides of a triangle such that the
sum of the intercepts made by the other sides, on parallels drawn
from the same point to these sides, may be equal to a given length.

24. If two angles have their legs respectively parallel, their
bisectors are either parallel or perpendicular.

25. If lines be drawn from the extremities of the base of a
triangle to the feet of perpendiculars let fall from the same points
on either bisector of the vertical angle, these lines meet on the
other bisector of the vertical angle.

26. The perpendiculars of a triangle are the bisectors of the
angles of the triangle whose vertices are the feet of these
perpendiculars.

27. Inscribe in a given triangle a parallelogram whose diagonals
shall intersect in a given point.

28. Construct a quadrilateral, the four sides being given in
magnitude, and the middle points of two opposite sides being
given in position.

29. The bases of two or more triangles having a common
vertex are given, both in magnitude and position, and the sum of the
areas is given; prove that the locus of the vertex is a right line.

30. If the sum of the perpendiculars let fall from a given
point on the sides of a given rectilineal figure be given, the locus
of the point is a right line.

31.  is an isosceles triangle whose equal sides are , ;
 is any secant cutting the equal sides in , , so that
: prove that  is greater than .

32. ,  are two given points, and  is a point in a given line
; prove that the difference of  and  is a maximum when
 bisects the angle ; and that their sum is a minimum if it
bisects the supplement.

33. Bisect a quadrilateral by a right line drawn from one of
its angular points.

34.  and  are two parallel lines cut obliquely by , and
perpendicularly by ; and between these lines we draw ,
cutting  in , such that ; prove that the angle 
is one-third of .

35. If  be the point of concurrence of the bisectors of the
angles of the triangle , and if  produced meet  in ,
and from ,  be drawn perpendicular to ; prove that the
angle  is equal to the angle .

36. If the exterior angles of a triangle be bisected, the three
external triangles formed on the sides of the original triangle are
equiangular.

37. The angle made by the bisectors of two consecutive angles
of a convex quadrilateral is equal to half the sum of the
remaining angles; and the angle made by the bisectors of two opposite
angles is equal to half the difference of the two other angles.

38. If in the construction of the figure, Proposition xlvii.,
,  be joined,




39. Given the middle points of the sides of a convex polygon
of an odd number of sides, construct the polygon.

40. Trisect a quadrilateral by lines drawn from one of its
angles.

41. Given the base of a triangle in magnitude and position and
the sum of the sides; prove that the perpendicular at either extremity
of the base to the adjacent side, and the external bisector
of the vertical angle, meet on a given line perpendicular to the
base.

42. The bisectors of the angles of a convex quadrilateral form
a quadrilateral whose opposite angles are supplemental. If the
first quadrilateral be a parallelogram, the second is a rectangle;
if the first be a rectangle, the second is a square.

43. The middle points of the sides , ,  of a triangle
are respectively , , ;  is drawn parallel to  to meet
; prove that the sides of the triangle  are respectively
equal to the three medians of the triangle .

44. Find the path of a billiard ball started from a given point
which, after being reflected from the four sides of the table, will
pass through another given point.

45. If two lines bisecting two angles of a triangle and terminated
by the opposite sides be equal, the triangle is isosceles.

46. State and prove the Proposition corresponding to Exercise
41, when the base and difference of the sides are given.

47. If a square be inscribed in a triangle, the rectangle under
its side and the sum of the base and altitude is equal to twice the
area of the triangle.

48. If ,  be equal sides of an isosceles triangle, and if
 be a perpendicular on ; prove that .

49. The sum of the equilateral triangles described on the legs
of a right-angled triangle is equal to the equilateral triangle described
on the hypotenuse.

50. Given the base of a triangle, the difference of the base
angles, and the sum or difference of the sides; construct it.

51. Given the base of a triangle, the median that bisects the
base, and the area; construct it.

52. If the diagonals ,  of a quadrilateral  intersect
in , and be bisected in the points , , then




53. If squares be described on the sides of any triangle, the
lines of connexion of the adjacent corners are respectively-(1) the
doubles of the medians of the triangle; (2) perpendicular to
them.
footnotesize



centerBOOK II. 
Theory of Rectangles
 tocBOOK II.

Every Proposition in the Second Book has either a
square or a rectangle in its enunciation. Before commencing
it the student should read the following preliminary
explanations: by their assistance it will be
seen that this Book, which is usually considered difficult,
will be rendered not only easy, but almost intuitively
evident.

1. As the linear unit is that by which we express all
linear measures, so the square unit is that to which all
superficial measures are referred. Again, as there are
different linear units in use, such as in this country,
inches, feet, yards, miles, c., and in France, metres,
and their multiples or sub-multiples, so different square
units are employed.

2. A square unit is the square described on a line
whose length is the linear unit. Thus a square inch is
the square described on a line whose length is an inch;
a square foot is the square described on a line whose
length is a foot, c.

3. If we take a linear foot, describe a square on it,
divide two adjacent sides each into twelve equal parts,
and draw parallels to the sides, we evidently divide the
square foot into square inches; and as there will manifestly
be 12 rectangular parallelograms, each containing
12 square inches, the square foot contains 144
square inches.

In the same manner it can be shown that a square
yard contains 9 square feet; and so in general the
square described on any line contains  times the
square described on the  part of the line. Thus, as
a simple case, the square on a line is four times the
square on its half. On account of this property the
second power of a quantity is called its square; and,
conversely, the square on a line  is expressed symbolically
by .

4. If a rectangular parallelogram be such that two
adjacent sides contain respectively  and  linear units,
by dividing one side into  and the other into  equal
parts, and drawing parallels to the sides, the whole area
is evidently divided into  square units. Hence the
area of the parallelogram is found by multiplying its
length by its breadth, and this explains why we say
(see Def. iv.) a rectangle is contained by any two adjacent
sides; for if we multiply the length of one by
the length of the other we have the area. Thus, if
,  be two adjacent sides of a rectangle, the rectangle
is expressed by .
footnotesize


Definitions.

1202f072

i. If a point  be taken in a line , the parts ,
 are called segments, and  a
point of division.

1402f073

ii. If C be taken in the line  produced, ,  are
still called the segments of
the line ; but  is called
a point of external division.

iii. A parallelogram whose angles are right angles is
called a rectangle.

1358f074

iv. A rectangle is said to
be contained by any two adjacent
sides. Thus the rectangle
 is said to be contained
by , , or by , ,
c.

v. The rectangle contained by two separate lines
such as  and
 is the parallelogram
formed by erecting a perpendicular to , at
, equal to , and drawing parallels: the area of the
rectangle will be .

208f075

1408f076

vi. In any parallelogram the figure which is composed
of either of the parallelograms
about a diagonal
and the two complements
[see I., xliii.] is called a
gnomon. Thus, if we take
away either of the parallelograms
,  from the
parallelogram , the remainder
is called a gnomon.

PROP. I.-Theorem.If there be two lines , one of which is divided
into any number of parts , the rectangle
contained by the two lines , is equal to the sum of
the rectangles contained by the undivided line  and the
several parts of the divided line.

1858f077

Dem.-Erect  at right angles to  [I., xi.] and
make it equal to . Complete the parallelogram 
(Def. v.). Through
,  draw , 
parallel to . Because
the angles at
, ,  are right
angles, each of the
quadrilaterals ,
,  is a rectangle.
Again, since  is equal to  (const.), the
rectangle contained by  and  is the rectangle contained
by  and  (Def. v.); but  is the rectangle
contained by  and . Hence the rectangle
contained by  and  is . In like manner the
rectangle contained by  and  is . Again, since
 is equal to  (const.), and  is equal to 
[I. xxxiv.],  is equal to . Hence the rectangle
contained by  and  is the figure  (Def. v.). In
like manner the rectangle contained by  and  is
the figure . Hence we have the following identities:-



But  is equal to the sum of , , 
(I., Axiom ix.). Therefore the rectangle contained by 
and  is equal to the sum of the rectangles contained by
 and ,  and ,  and .

If we denote the lines , ,  by , , , the Proposition
asserts that the rectangle contained by , and  is equal to
the sum of the rectangles contained by  and ,  and ,  and ,
or, as it may be written, . This corresponds
to the distributive law in multiplication, and shows that
rectangles in Geometry, and products in Arithmetic and Algebra,
are subject to the same rules.
Illustration.-Suppose  to be 6 inches; , 5 inches;
, 4 inches; , 3 inches; then  will be 12 inches; and
the rectangles will have the following values:-



Now the sum of the three last rectangles, viz. 30, 24, 18, is 72.
Hence the rectangle .
footnotesize
The Second Book is occupied with the relations between
the segments of a line divided in various ways.
All these can be proved in the most simple manner
by Algebraic Multiplication. We recommend the student
to make himself acquainted with the proofs by
this method as well as with those of Euclid. He will
thus better understand the meaning of each Proposition.
Cor. 1.-The rectangle contained by a line and the
difference of two others is equal to the difference of the
rectangles contained by the line and each of the others.

Cor. 2.-The area of a triangle is equal to half the
rectangle contained by its base and perpendicular.
1207f078

Dem.-From the vertex  let fall the perpendicular
. Draw  parallel to ,
and ,  each parallel to
. Then  is the rectangle
contained by  and ;
but  is equal to . Hence
; but [I. xli.]
the triangle  is  half the
parallelogram . Therefore
the triangle  is .

PROP. II.-Theorem.If a line  be divided into any two parts at ,
the square on the whole line is equal to the sum of the
rectangles contained by the whole and each of the segments
.

10010f079

Dem.-On  describe the square  [I. xlvi.],
and through  draw  parallel to
 [I. xxxi.]. Now, since  is
equal to , the rectangle contained
by  and  is equal to
the rectangle contained by  and
; but  is the rectangle contained
by  and . Hence the
rectangle contained by  and 
is equal to . In like manner
the rectangle contained by  and  is equal to the
figure . Therefore the sum of the two rectangles
,  is equal to the square on .

*
&Or thus: & AB &= AC + CB,  &&

&and & AB &= AB.  &&

&Hence, multiplying, we get & AB^2 &= AB.AC + AB.CB.
&Hence, multiplying, we get &

This Proposition is the particular case of i. when the divided
and undivided lines are equal, hence it does not require a separate
Demonstration.
footnotesize

PROP. III.-Theorem.If a line  be divided into two segments at , the
rectangle contained by the whole line and either segment
 is equal to the square on that segment together with
the rectangle contained by the segments.

1306f080

Dem.-On  describe the square  [I. xlvi.].
Through  draw  parallel
to : produce  to meet
 in . Now since  is
equal to , the rectangle
contained by ,  is equal
to the rectangle contained by
, ; but the rectangle contained by ,  is the
figure . Hence the rectangle  is equal to
the figure , and the square on  is the figure .
Hence the rectangle , together with the square
on , is equal to the figure .

Again, since  is equal to , the rectangle 
is equal to the rectangle ; but the rectangle
 is equal to the figure . Hence the rectangle
 is equal to the figure . And since
things which are equal to the same are equal to one
another, the rectangle , together with the square
on , is equal to the rectangle .

*
&Or thus:&  AB &= AC + CB,  &&

&&                  CB &= CB.  &&

&Hence & AB.CB &= AC.CB + CB^2. &Or thus: 

Prop. iii. is the particular case of Prop. i., when the undivided
line is equal to a segment of the divided line.
footnotesize

PROP. IV.-Theorem.If a line  be divided into any two parts at ,
the square on the whole line is equal to the sum of the
squares on the parts , together with twice their
rectangle.

1009f081

Dem.-On  describe a square . Join ;
through  draw  parallel to ,
intersecting  in ; and through
 draw  parallel to .

Now since  is equal to ,
the angle  is equal to 
[I. v.]; but since  intersects the
parallels , , the angle  is
equal to  [I. xxix.]. Hence
the angle  is equal to ,
and therefore [I. vi.]  is equal to ; but  is
equal to  and  to . Hence the figure 
is a lozenge, and the angle  is right. Hence
(I., Def. xxx.) it is a square. In like manner the
figure  is a square.

Again, since  is equal to , the rectangle 
is equal to the rectangle ; but  is the
figure  (Def. iv.). Therefore the rectangle 
is equal to the figure . Now the figures , 
are equal [I. xliii.], being the complements about the
diagonal of the parallelogram . Hence the parallelograms
,  are together equal to twice the
rectangle . Again, the figure  is the square
on , and  is equal to . Therefore  is
equal to the square on , and  is the square on
; but the whole figure , which is the square
on , is the sum of the four figures , , ,
. Therefore the square on  is equal to the sum
of the squares on , , and twice the rectangle
.
10510f082


Or thus: On  describe the square , and cut off ,
,  each equal to . Join , ,
, . Now the four s , ,
,  are evidently equal; therefore
their sum is equal to four times the
; but the  is half the
rectangle  (i. Cor. 2)-that is, equal
to half the rectangle . Therefore
the sum of the four triangles is equal to
.

Again, the figure  is a square
[I. xlvi., Cor. 3], and equal to 
[I. xlvii.]-that is, equal to . Hence the whole figure
.
*
&Or thus:&  AB &= AC + CB.&   

&Squaring, we get &  AB^2 = &AC^2 + 2AC.CB + CB^2.&  Squaring, we get 

Cor. 1.-The parallelograms about the diagonal of a
square are squares.

1207f083

Cor. 2.-The square on a line is equal to four times the
square on its half.

For let , then .

This Cor. may be proved by
the First Book thus: Erect 
at right angles to , and make
 or . Join , .

*
&Then&  AD^2 = AC^2 &+ CD^2=2 AC^2&  

&In like manner,&  DB^2 &= 2 CB^2;&  In like manner, 

&therefore&  AD^2 + DB^2 &= 2AC^2 + 2CB^2 = 4AC^2.&

But since the angle  is right, ;
*
&therefore&  AB^2 &= 4AC^2.& foretherefore

Cor. 3.-If a line be divided into any number of parts,
the square on the whole is equal to the sum of the squares
on all the parts, together with twice the sum of the rectangles
contained by the several distinct pairs of parts.


Exercises.


1. Prove Proposition iv. by using Propositions ii. and iii.

2. If from the vertical angle of a right-angled triangle a perpendicular
be let fall on the hypotenuse, its square is equal to the
rectangle contained by the segments of the hypotenuse.

3. From the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle portions are
cut off equal to the adjacent sides; prove that the square on the
middle segment is equal to twice the rectangle contained by the
extreme segments.

4. In any right-angled triangle the square on the sum of the
hypotenuse and perpendicular, from the right angle on the
hypotenuse, exceeds the square on the sum of the sides by the square
on the perpendicular.

5. The square on the perimeter of a right-angled triangle is
equal to twice the rectangle contained by the sum of the
hypotenuse and one side, and the sum of the hypotenuse and the other
side.
footnotesize

PROP. V.-Theorem.If a line  be divided into two equal parts at ,
and also into two unequal parts at , the rectangle
 contained by the unequal parts, together with
the square on the part  between the points of section,
is equal to the square on half the line.

1507f084

Dem.-On  describe the square  [I. xlvi.].
Join . Through  draw
 parallel to , meeting
 in . Through 
draw  parallel to ,
and through  draw 
parallel to  [I. xxxi.].

The parallelogram 
is equal to  [I. xliii., Cor. 2]; but  is equal to
 [I. xxxvi.], because they are on equal bases ,
, and between the same parallels; therefore  is
equal to : to each add , and we get the parallelogram
 equal to the gnomon ; but  is
equal to the rectangle , and therefore equal
to the rectangle , since  is equal to 
[iv., Cor. 1]; therefore the rectangle  is
equal to the gnomon , and the square on  is
equal to the figure . Hence the rectangle ,
together with the square on , is equal to the whole
figure -that is, to the square on .

*
&Or thus: & AD &=          AC+CD =   BC+CD;  &&

&                         & DB &= AC+CD = BC-CD;  &&

&therefore &      AD.BD &= (BC + CD) (BC-CD) = BC^2-CD^2.  &&

&Hence     &2

Cor. 1.-The rectangle  is the rectangle
contained by the sum of the lines ,  and their
difference; and we have proved it equal to the difference
between the square on  and the square on .
Hence the difference of the squares on two lines is equal
to the rectangle contained by their sum and their difference.

Cor. 2.-The perimeter of the rectangle  is equal
to , and is therefore independent of the position of
the point  on the line ; and the area of the same
rectangle is less than the square on half the line by the
square on the segment between  and the middle
point of the line; therefore, when  is the middle
point, the rectangle will have the maximum area.
Hence, of all rectangles having the same perimeter, the
square has the greatest area.


Exercises.


1. Divide a given line so that the rectangle contained by its
parts may have a maximum area.

2. Divide a given line so that the rectangle contained by its
segments may be equal to a given square, not exceeding the
square on half the given line.

3. The rectangle contained by the sum and the difference of
two sides of a triangle is equal to the rectangle contained by the
base and the difference of the segments of the base, made by the
perpendicular from the vertex.

4. The difference of the sides of a triangle is less than the
difference of the segments of the base, made by the perpendicular
from the vertex.

5. The difference between the square on one of the equal sides
of an isosceles triangle, and the square on any line drawn from
the vertex to a point in the base, is equal to the rectangle contained
by the segments of the base.

6. The square on either side of a right-angled triangle is equal
to the rectangle contained by the sum and the difference of the
hypotenuse and the other side.
footnotesize

PROP. VI.-Theorem.If a line  be bisected at , and divided externally
in any point , the rectangle  contained
by the segments made by the external point, together with
the square on half the line, is equal to the square on the
segment between the middle point and the point of external
division.

1509f085

Dem.-On  describe the square  [I. xlvi.],
and join ; through 
draw  parallel to 
[I. xxxi.], meeting  in
; through  draw 
parallel to ; and through
 draw  parallel to .
Then because  is equal to
, the rectangle  is equal
to  [I. xxxvi.]; but the complements ,  are
equal [I. xliii.]; therefore  is equal to . To
each of these equals add  and , and we get 
and  equal to the square ; but  is equal to
the rectangle , and therefore equal to the
rectangle , since  is equal to ; also 
is equal to the square on , and  is the square
on . Hence the rectangle , together with the
square on , is equal to the square on . 
*4Or thus:-
1409f086

Dem.-On  describe the square  [I. xlvi.].Join . Through  draw
 parallel to , meeting
 produced in . Through
 draw  parallel to .
Through  draw  parallel to  [I. xxxi.].

The parallelogram  is
equal to  [I. xliii.]; but
 is equal to  [I. xxxvi.],
because they are on equal bases , , and between
the same parallels; therefore  is equal to . To
each add , and we get the parallelogram  equal
to the gnomon ; but  is equal to the rectangle
, and therefore equal to the rectangle ,
since  is equal to  [iv., Cor. 1]; therefore the
rectangle  is equal to the gnomon , and
the square on  is the figure . Therefore the rectangle
, together with the square on , is equal
to the whole figure -that is, equal to the square
on  or to the square on .

*
&Or thus:&
   AD =&          AC + CD =  CD + CB;  &&Or thus


&& BD =& AC + CD =  CD - CB.  &&

&Hence &
  AD.DB =& (CD+CB) (CD-CB) = CD^2-CB^2;  &&

&therefore & AD & .DB + CB^2 = CD^2.  &&

Exercises.


1. Show that Proposition vi. is reduced to Proposition v. by
producing the line in the opposite direction.

2. Divide a given line externally, so that the rectangle contained
by its segments may be equal to the square on a given
line.

3. Given the difference of two lines and the rectangle contained
by them; find the lines.

4. The rectangle contained by any two lines is equal to the
square on half the sum, minus the square on half the difference.

5. Given the sum or the difference of two lines and the difference
of their squares; find the lines.

6. If from the vertex  of an isosceles triangle a line  be
drawn to any point in the base produced, prove that .

7. Give a common enunciation which will include Propositions
v. and vi.
footnotesize

PROP. VII.-Theorem.If a right line  be divided into any two parts
at , the sum of the squares on the whole line 
and either segment  is equal to twice the rectangle
 contained by the whole line and that segment,
together with the square on the other segment.

958f087

Dem.-On  describe the square . Join .
Through  draw  parallel to ,
intersecting  in . Through 
draw  parallel to .

Now the square  is equal to the
three figures , , and : to
each add the square , and we
have the sum of the squares , 
equal to the sum of the three figures
, , ; but  is equal to ; therefore the
sum of the squares ,  is equal to twice the
figure , together with the figure . Now 
is the rectangle ; but  is equal to ;
therefore  is equal to the rectangle , and
 is the square on ;  the square on ; and 
is the square on , and therefore equal to the square
on . Hence the sum of the squares on  and 
is equal to twice the rectangle , together with the
square on .
12012f088


Or thus: On  describe the square . Produce the sides
, , , and make each produced
part equal to . Join , , ,
. Then the figure  is a square
[I. xlvi., Ex. 3], and it is equal to the
square on , together with the four
equal triangles , , , .
Now [I. xlvii.], the figure  is
equal to the sum of the squares on ,
-that is, equal to the sum of the
squares on , ; and the sum of the
four triangles is equal to twice the rectangle
, for each triangle is equal
to half the rectangle . Hence the sum of the squares on
,  is equal to twice the rectangle , together with the
square on .
*
&Or thus: & AC = AB-BC; &
&&Or thus: 

&therefore & AC^2 = AB^2 - 2AB.BC &+ BC^2;  &&

&therefore & AC^2 + 2AB.BC = AB^2 &+ BC^2.  &&

Comparison of iv. and vii.

By iv., square on sum  sum of squares  twice rectangle.

By vii., square on difference = sum of squares-twice
rectangle.
footnotesize

Cors. from iv. and vii.

1. Square on the sum, the sum of the squares, and
the square on the difference of any two lines, are in
arithmetical progression.

2. Square on the sum  square on the difference of
any two lines  twice the sum of the squares on the
lines (Props. ix. and x.).

3. The square on the sum  the square on the difference
of any two lines  four times the rectangle under
lines (Prop. viii.).


PROP. VIII.-Theorem.If a line  be divided into two parts at , the
square on the sum of the whole line  and either segment
 is equal to four times the rectangle contained
by the whole line  and that segment, together with
the square on the other segment .

1108f089

Dem.-Produce  to . Make  equal to .
On  describe the square 
[I.  xlvi.]. Join . Through
,  draw ,  parallel to 
[I.  xxxi.], and through ,  draw
,  parallel to .

Since  is the square on ,
and  the square on , and
 is the half of ,  is equal
to four times  [iv., Cor. 1].
Again, since ,  are the sides of equal squares,
they are equal [I. xlvi., Cor. 1]. Hence the parallelogram
 is equal to  [I.  xxxvi.]. In like manner
 is equal to ; but  is equal to  [I.  xliii.].
Therefore the four figures , , ,  are all
equal; hence their sum is equal to four times ; and
the square  has been proved to be equal to four times
. Hence the gnomon  is equal to four times
the rectangle -that is, equal to four times the
rectangle , since  is equal to .

Again, the figure  is the square on , and
therefore equal to the square on . Hence the
whole figure , that is, the square on , is equal
to four times the rectangle , together with the
square on .
1059f090


Or thus: Produce  to , and make . On 
describe the square . Cut off , ,  each equal to
. Through  and  draw lines parallel to , and through 
and , lines parallel to .

Now it is evident that the four rectangles.
, , ,  are all equal; but 
is the rectangle  or .
Therefore the sum of the four rectangles
is equal to . Again, the figure
 is evidently equal to the square on
. Hence the whole figure, which is
the square on , or the square on the
sum of  and , is equal to .
*
&Or thus: &
      AB + BC &= AC +2BC;  &&Or thus: 

&therefore &
  (AB + BC)^2 &= AC^2 + 4AC.CB + 4BC^2  &&

&&            &= AC^2 + 4 (AC + CB).CB  &&

&&            &= AC^2 + 4AB.BC.  &&
footnotesize

Direct sequence from v. or vi.

Since by v. or vi. the rectangle contained by any two
lines is  the square on half their sum  the square on
half their difference; therefore four times the rectangle
contained by any two lines  the square on their sum
 the square on their difference.

Direct sequence of viii. from iv. and vii.

By iv., the square on the sum  the sum of the squares
 twice the rectangle.

By vii., the square on the difference  the sum of the
squares  twice the rectangle. Therefore, by subtraction,
the square on the sum  the square on the
difference  four times the rectangle.


Exercises.


1. In the figure [I. xlvii.] if ,  be joined, prove
.

2. Prove . 2. Prove 

3.  Ex. 3 occurs in the solution of the problem of the inscription
  of a regular polygon of seventeen sides in a circle. See note C.
Given the difference of two lines , and their rectangle
; find the lines.
footnotesize

PROP. IX.-Theorem.If a line  be bisected at  and divided into two
unequal parts at , the sum of the squares on the unequal
parts  is double the sum of the squares on half
the line , and on the segment  between the points
of section.

1459f091

Dem.-Erect  at right angles to , and make it
equal to  or . Join
, . Draw  parallel
to , and  parallel to
. Join .

Because  is equal to ,
and the angle  is right,
the angle  is half a right
angle. In like manner the
angles ,  are half right angles; therefore the
whole angle  is right. Again, because  is parallel
to , and  intersects them, the angle  is
equal to ; but  is right (const.); therefore
 is right; and  has been proved to be half a
right angle; therefore the angle  is half a right
angle [I. xxxii.]. Therefore [I. vi.]  is equal to
. In like manner  is equal to .

Again, since  is equal to ,  is equal to
; but  is equal to  [I. xlvii.].
Therefore  is equal to . In like manner 
is equal to  or . Therefore  is
equal to ; but  is equal to 
[I. xlvii.]. Therefore  is equal to .

Again, since  is equal to ,  is equal to :
to each add , and we get  equal to ; but  is equal to ; therefore 
is equal to ; and we have proved  equal
to . Therefore  is equal to .

*
&Or thus: &&AD = AC +CD; DB = AC-CD.& 

&Square and add, and we get &&AD^2 + DB^2 = 2AC^2 + 2CD^2.&Square and ad
footnotesize



Exercises.


1. The sum of the squares on the segments of a line of given
length is a minimum when it is bisected.

2. Divide a given line internally, so that the sum of the squares
on the parts may be equal to a given square, and state the limitation
to its possibility.

3. If a line  be bisected in  and divided unequally in ,




4. Twice the square on the line joining any point in the hypotenuse
of a right-angled isosceles triangle to the vertex is equal to
the sum of the squares on the segments of the hypotenuse.

5. If a line be divided into any number of parts, the continued
product of all the parts is a maximum, and the sum of their squares
is a minimum when all the parts are equal.
footnotesize


PROP. X.-Theorem.If a line  be bisected at  and divided externally
at , the sum of the squares on the segments 
made by the external point is equal to twice the square on
half the line, and twice the square on the segment between
the points of section.

18411f092

Dem.-Erect  at right angles to , and make
it equal to  or .
Join , . Draw
 parallel to , and
produce . Now
since  is parallel to
, the angle  is
 to  [I. xxix.],
and [I. xv.] the angle
 is  to ;
but the sum of the
angles ,  is
less than two right angles [I. xvii.]; therefore the sum
of the angles ,  is less than two right angles,
and therefore [I., Axiom xii.] the lines , , if produced,
will meet. Let them meet in . Through 
draw  parallel to , and produce  to meet it in
. Join .

Because  is equal to , and the angle  is right,
the angle  is half a right angle. In like manner
the angles ,  are half right angles; therefore
the whole angle  is right. Again, because 
is parallel to , and  intersects them, the angle 
is equal to  [I. xxix.]; but  is right (const.);
therefore  is right, and  has been proved to
be half a right angle; therefore [I. xxxii.]  is
half a right angle, and therefore [I. vi.]  is equal
to . In like manner  is equal to .

Again, since  is equal to ,  is equal to ;
but  is equal to  +  [I. xlvii.]; therefore
 is equal to . In like manner  is equal to
 or ; therefore  is equal to ; but  is equal to  [I. xlvii.].
Therefore  is equal to .

Again, since  is equal to ,  is equal to
: to each add , and we get  equal to
; but  is equal to ; therefore
 is equal to ; and  has been proved
equal to . Therefore  is equal
to .


*
&Or thus:  &&  AD = CD + AC, &Or thus:

  &&&  BD = CD-AC.


Square and add, and we get .

The following enunciations include Propositions ix.
and x.:-

1. The square on the sum of any two lines plus the
square on their difference equal twice the sum of their
squares.

 2. The sum of the squares on any two lines it equal to
twice the square on half the sum plus twice the square on
half the difference of the lines.

 3. If a line be cut into two unequal parts, and also
into two equal parts, the sum of the squares on the two
unequal parts exceeds the sum of the squares on the two
equal parts by the sum of the squares of the two differences
between the equal and unequal parts.

Exercises.


1. Given the sum or the difference of any two lines, and the
sum of their squares; find the lines.

2. The sum of the squares on two sides ,  of a triangle is
equal to twice the square on half the base , and twice the
square on the median which bisects .

3. If the base of a triangle be given both in magnitude and
position, and the sum of the squares on the sides in magnitude,
the locus of the vertex is a circle.

4. If in the  a point  in the base  be such that



prove that the middle point of  is equally distant from 
and .

5. The sum of the squares on the sides of a parallelogram is
equal to the sum of the squares on its diagonals.
footnotesize

PROP. XI.-Problem.To divide a given finite line  into two segments
in , so that the rectangle  contained by
the whole line and one segment may be equal to the
square on the other segment.9512f093

Sol.-On  describe the square  [I. xlvi.].
Bisect  in . Join . Produce  to , and
make  equal to . On  describe the square
.  is the point required.


Dem.-Produce  to . Then because  is bisected
in , and divided externally
in , the rectangle , together
with the square on , is equal to the
square on  [vi.]; but  is equal
to  (const.); therefore the rectangle
, together with , is
equal to -that is [I. xlvii.] equal
to . Rejecting , which
is common, we get the rectangle
 equal to . Again, since
 is equal to , being the sides of
a square, the rectangle  is equal to -that
is, to the figure ; and  is equal to the figure
; therefore  is equal to . Reject the part
, which is common, and we get the figure  equal
to the figure ; but  is equal to the rectangle
, because  is equal to , and  is the
square on . Therefore the rectangle  is
equal to the square on .

Def.-A line divided as in this Proposition is said to
be divided in "extreme and mean ratio."

Cor. 1.-The line C is divided in "extreme and
mean ratio" at .

Cor. 2.-If from the greater segment  of  we
take a segment equal to , it is evident that  will
be divided into parts respectively equal to , .
Hence, if a line be divided in extreme and mean ratio,
the greater segment will be cut in the same manner
by taking on it a part equal to the less; and the less
will be similarly divided by taking on it a part equal
to the difference, and so on, c.

1383f094

Cor. 3.-Let  be divided in "extreme and mean
ratio" in , then it is evident
(Cor. 2) that  is greater
than . Cut off ;
then (Cor. 2)  is cut in "extreme and mean ratio" at
, and  is greater than . Next, cut off  equal
to , and in the same manner we have  greater
than , and so on. Now since  is greater than ,
it is evident that  is not a common measure of 
and , and therefore not a common measure of 
and . In like manner  is not a common measure
of  and , and therefore not a common measure of
 and . Hence, no matter how far we proceed
we cannot arrive at any remainder which will be a
common measure of  and . Hence, the parts of a
line divided in "extreme and mean ratio"are incommensurable.
Exercises.


1. Cut a line externally in "extreme and mean ratio."

2. The difference between the squares on the segments of a
line divided in "extreme and mean ratio" is equal to their
rectangle.

3. In a right-angled triangle, if the square on one side be equal
to the rectangle contained by the hypotenuse and the other side,
the hypotenuse is cut in "extreme and mean ratio" by the
perpendicular on it from the right angle.

4. If  be cut in "extreme and mean ratio" at , prove
that
*

5. The three lines joining the pairs of points , ; , ;
, , in the construction of Proposition xi., are parallel.

6. If  intersect  in ,  is perpendicular to .

7. If  be produced, it meets  at right angles.

8.  is a right-angled triangle having : if 
be made equal to the difference between  and ,  is
divided in "extreme and mean ratio" at .
footnotesize

PROP. XII.-Theorem.In an obtuse-angled triangle , the square on the
side  subtending the obtuse angle exceeds the sum of
the squares on the sides  containing the obtuse
angle, by twice the rectangle contained by either of them
, and its continuation  to meet a perpendicular
 on it from the opposite angle.

1278f095

Dem.-Because  is divided into two parts in ,
we have
*
&&BD^2=BC^2 &+ CD^2 + 2BC.CD  [iv.] 

&and && AD^2 = AD^2.
Hence, adding, since [I. xlvii.]
, and , we get



Therefore  is greater than  by .
14516f096


The foregoing proof differs from Euclid's only in the use of
symbols. I have found by experience that pupils more readily
understand it than any other method.
Or thus: By the First Book:
Describe squares on the three
sides. Draw , ,  perpendicular
to the sides of the
squares. Then it can be proved
exactly as in the demonstration
of [I. xlvii.], that the rectangle
 is equal to ,  to ,
and  to . Hence the sum
of the two squares on ,  is
less than the square on  by
twice the rectangle ; that is,
by twice the rectangle .

Cor. 1.-If perpendiculars
from  and  to the opposite
sides meet them in  and ,
the rectangle  is equal
to the rectangle .
footnotesize


Exercises.


1. If the angle  of a triangle be equal to twice the angle
of an equilateral triangle,  .

2.  is a quadrilateral whose opposite angles  and  are
right, and ,  produced meet in ; prove .

3.  is a right-angled triangle, and  is a perpendicular
on the hypotenuse ; Prove .

4. If a line  be divided in  so that ; prove that
.

5. If  be the diameter of a semicircle, find a point  in 
such that, joining  to a fixed point  in the circumference, and
erecting a perpendicular  meeting the circumference in ,
 may be equal to a given square.

6. If the square of a line , drawn from the angle  of an
equilateral triangle  to a point  in the side  produced,
be equal to ; prove that  is cut in "extreme and mean
ratio" at .
footnotesize

PROP. XIII.-Theorem.In any triangle , the square on any side subtending
an acute angle  is less than the sum of the squares
on the sides containing that angle, by twice the rectangle
 contained by either of them  and the intercept
 between the acute angle and the foot of the perpendicular
on it from the opposite angle.

1187f097

Dem.-Because  is divided into two segments
in ,



*
&and && AD^2 = AD^2.  &&and 
Hence, adding, since
*
&&CD^2 + AD^2 = AC^2 & [I. xlvii.],

&and &     BD^2 + AD^2 &= AB^2,  &&we get 

&we get &  BC^2 + AC^2 &= AB^2 + 2BC.CD.  &&
Therefore  is less than  by .

206f098

Or thus: Describe squares on the sides. Draw ,
,  perpendicular to the sides; then, as in the
demonstration of [I. xlvii.], the rectangle  is equal
to ;  to , and  to . Hence the sum of
the squares on ,  exceeds the square on  by twice
-that is, by .

Observation.-By comparing the proofs of the pairs of
Props. iv. and vii.; v. and vi.; ix. and x.; xii. and xiii., it
will be seen that they are virtually identical. In order to render
this identity more apparent, we have made some slight alterations
in the usual proofs. The pairs of Propositions thus grouped are
considered in Modern Geometry not as distinct, but each pair is
regarded as one Proposition.
footnotesize

Exercises.


1. If the angle  of the  be equal to an angle of an
equilateral , .

2. The sum of the squares on the diagonals of a quadrilateral,
together with four times the square on the line joining their
middle points, is equal to the sum of the squares on its sides.

3. Find a point  in a given line  produced, so that
.
footnotesize

PROP. XIV.-Problem.To construct a square equal to a given rectilineal figure .

225f099

Sol.-Construct [I. xlv.] the rectangle  equal to
. Then, if the adjacent sides ,  be equal, 
is a square, and the problem is solved; if not, produce
 to , and make  equal to ; bisect  in ;
with  as centre and  as radius, describe the semicircle
; produce  to meet it in . The square
described on  will be equal to .

Dem.-Join . Then because  is divided
equally in  and unequally in , the rectangle ,
together with  is equal to  [v.], that is, to ;
but  is equal to  [I. xlvii.]. Therefore
the rectangle  is equal to .
Reject , which is common, and we have the rectangle
; but since  is equal to ,
the rectangle  is equal to the figure .
Therefore  is equal to the figure , and therefore
equal to the given rectilineal figure .

Cor.-The square on the perpendicular from any
point in a semicircle on the diameter is equal to the
rectangle contained by the segments of the diameter.


Exercises.


1. Given the difference of the squares on two lines and their
rectangle; find the lines.

2. Divide a given line, so that the rectangle contained by
another given line and one segment may be equal to the square
on the other segment.
footnotesize

Questions for Examination on Book II.


1. What is the subject-matter of Book II.? Ans. Theory of
rectangles.

2. What is a rectangle? A gnomon?

3. What is a square inch? A square foot? A square perch?
A square mile? Ans. The square described on a line whose
length is an inch, a foot, a perch, c.

4. What is the difference between linear and superficial measurement?
Ans. Linear measurement has but one dimension;
superficial has two.

5. When is a line said to be divided internally? When externally?

6. How is the area of a rectangle found?

7. How is a line divided so that the rectangle contained by its
segments may be a maximum?

8. How is the area of a parallelogram found?

9. What is the altitude of a parallelogram whose base is 65
metres and area 1430 square metres?

10. How is a line divided when the sum of the squares on its
segments is a minimum?

11. The area of a rectangle is 108.60 square metres and its
perimeter is 48.20 linear metres; find its dimensions.

12. What Proposition in Book II. expresses the distributive
law of multiplication?

13. On what proposition is the rule for extracting the square
root founded?

14. Compare I. xlvii. and II. xii. and xiii.

15. If the sides of a triangle be expressed by , ,
and  linear units, respectively; prove that it is right-angled.

16. How would you construct a square whose area would be
exactly an acre? Give a solution by I. xlvii.

17. What is meant by incommensurable lines? Give an example
from Book II.

18. Prove that a side and the diagonal of a square are incommensurable.

19. The diagonals of a lozenge are 16 and 30 metres respectively;
find the length of a side.

20. The diagonal of a rectangle is 4.25 perches, and its area is
7.50 square perches; what are its dimensions?

21. The three sides of a triangle are 8, 11, 15; prove that it
has an obtuse angle.

22. The sides of a triangle are 13, 14, 15; find the lengths of
its medians; also the lengths of its perpendiculars, and prove
that all its angles are acute.

23. If the sides of a triangle be expressed by , ,
and  linear units, respectively; prove that it is right-angled.

24. If on each side of a square containing 5.29 square perches
we measure from the corners respectively a distance of 1.5 linear
perches; find the area of the square formed by joining the points
thus found.
footnotesize

Exercises on Book II.


1. The squares on the diagonals of a quadrilateral are together
double the sum of the squares on the lines joining the middle
points of opposite sides.

2. If the medians of a triangle intersect in , .

3. Through a given point  draw three lines , ,  of
given lengths, such that their extremities may be collinear, and
that .

4. If in any quadrilateral two opposite sides be bisected, the
sum of the squares on the other two sides, together with the sum
of the squares on the diagonals, is equal to the sum of the squares
on the bisected sides, together with four times the square on the
line joining the points of bisection.

5. If squares be described on the sides of any triangle, the
sum of the squares on the lines joining the adjacent corners is
equal to three times the sum of the squares on the sides of the
triangle.


6. Divide a given line into two parts, so that the rectangle
contained by the whole and one segment may be equal to any
multiple of the square on the other segment.

7. If  be any point in the diameter  of a semicircle, and
 any parallel chord, then




8. If , , ,  be four collinear points taken in order,




9. Three times the sum of the squares on the sides of any
pentagon exceeds the sum of the squares on its diagonals, by four
times the sum of the squares on the lines joining the middle
points of the diagonals.

10. In any triangle, three times the sum of the squares on the
sides is equal to four times the sum of the squares on the medians.

11. If perpendiculars be drawn from the angular points of a
square to any line, the sum of the squares on the perpendiculars
from one pair of opposite angles exceeds twice the rectangle
of the perpendiculars from the other pair by the area of the
square.

12. If the base  of a triangle be divided in , so that , then




13. If the point  be taken in  produced, so that , then




14. Given the base of a triangle in magnitude and position,
and the sum or the difference of  times the square on one side
and  times the square on the other side, in magnitude, the locus
of the vertex is a circle.

15. Any rectangle is equal to half the rectangle contained by
the diagonals of squares described on its adjacent sides.

16. If , , . c., be any number of fixed points, and  a
variable point, find the locus of , if  c., be
given in magnitude.

17. If the area of a rectangle be given, its perimeter is a minimum
when it is a square.


18. If a transversal cut in the points , ,  three lines
issuing from a point , prove that




19. Upon the segments ,  of a line  equilateral triangles
are described: prove that if ,  be the centres of circles
described about these triangles, .

20. If , ,  denote the sides of a right-angled triangle about
the right angle, and the perpendicular from the right angle on
the hypotenuse, .

21. If, upon the greater segment  of a line , divided in
extreme and mean ratio, an equilateral triangle  be described,
and  joined, .

22. If a variable line, whose extremities rest on the circumferences
of two given concentric circles, subtend a right angle at
any fixed point, the locus of its middle point is a circle.
footnotesize



BOOK IIITheory of the Circle

i. Equal circles are those whose radii are equal.

This is a theorem, and not a definition. For if two circles
have equal radii, they are evidently congruent figures, and therefore
equal. From this way of proving this theorem Props. xxvi.-xxix. follow
as immediate inferences.
footnotesize
ii. A chord of a circle is the line joining two points
in its circumference.

If the chord be produced both ways, the whole line is called a
secant, and each of the parts into which a secant divides the circumference
is called an arc-the greater the major conjugate arc,
and the lesser the minor conjugate arc.-Newcomb.footnotesize
12610f100

iii. A right line is said to
touch a circle when it meets
the circle, and, being produced
both ways, does not cut it;
the line is called a tangentto the circle, and the point
where it touches it the point
of contact.

In Modern Geometry a curve is considered as made up of an
infinite number of points, which are placed in order along the
curve, and then the secant through two consecutive points is a
tangent. Euclid's definition for a tangent is quite inadequate for
any curve but the circle, and those derived from it by projection
(the conic sections); and even for these the modern definition is
better.
footnotesize
1609f101

iv. Circles are said to
touch one another when
they meet, but do not
intersect. There are two
species of contact:-

1. When each circle is
external to the other.

2. When one is inside
the other.

The following is the modern definition of curve-contact:-
When two curves have two, three, four, c., consecutive points
common, they have contact of the first, second, third, c., orders.
footnotesize
v. A segment of a circle is a figure bounded by a
chord and one of the arcs into which it divides the
circumference.

vi. Chords are said to be equally distant from the
centre when the perpendiculars drawn to them from
the centre are equal.

vii. The angle contained by two lines, drawn from
any point in the circumference of a segment to the
extremities of its chord, is called an angle in the segment.

viii. The angle of a segment is the angle contained
between its chord and the tangent at either extremity.

A theorem is tacitly assumed in this Definition, namely, that
the angles which the chord makes with the tangent at its extremities
are equal. We shall prove this further on.
footnotesize
ix. An angle in a segment is said to stand on its
conjugate arc.

956f102

x. Similar segments of circles are
those that contain equal angles.

xi. A sector of a circle is formed
of two radii and the arc included
between them.

To a pair of radii may belong either of the two conjugate arcs
into which their ends divide the circle.-Newcomb.footnotesize

xii. Concentric circles are those that have the same
centre.

xiii. Points which lie on the circumference of a
circle are said to be concyclic.
xiv. A cyclic quadrilateral is one which is inscribed
in a circle.

xv. It will be proper to give here an explanation of
the extended meaning of the word angle in Modern
Geometry. This extension is necessary in Trigonometry,
in Mechanics-in fact, in every application of
Geometry, and has been partly given in I. Def. ix.

308f103

Thus, if a line  revolve about the point , as in
figures 1, 2, 3, 4, until it comes into the position ,
the amount of the rotation from  to  is called an
angle. From the diagrams we see that in fig. 1 it is
less than two right angles; in fig. 2 it is equal to two
right angles; in fig. 3 greater than two right angles,
but less than four; and in fig. 4 it is greater than four
right angles. The arrow-heads denote the direction or
sense, as it is technically termed, in which the line 
turns. It is usual to call the direction indicated in the
above figures positive, and the opposite negative. A line
such as , which turns about a fixed point, is called
a ray, and then we have the following definition:-

xvi. A ray which turns in the sense opposite to the
hands of a watch describes a positive angle, and one
which turns in the same direction as the hands, a
negative angle.

PROP. I.-Problem.To find the centre of a given circle .

1039f104

Sol.-Take any two points ,  in the circumference.
Join . Bisect it in . Erect
 at right angles to . Produce
 to meet the circle again in .
Bisect  in . Then  is the
centre.

Dem.-If possible, let any other
point  be the centre. Join ,
, . Then in the triangles
,  we have  equal to
 (const.),  common, and the
base  equal to , because they are drawn from ,
which is, by hypothesis, the centre, to the circumference.
Hence [I. viii.] the angle  is equal to
the adjacent angle , and therefore [I. Def. xiii.]
each is a right angle; but the angle  is right
(const.); therefore  is equal to -a part equal
to the whole-which is absurd. Hence no point can
be the centre which is not in the line . Therefore ,
the middle point of , must be the centre.

The foregoing proof may be abridged as follows:-

Because  bisects  at right angles, every point
equally distant from, the points ,  must lie in 
[I. x. Ex. 2]; but the centre is equally distant from
 and ; hence the centre must be in ; and since
it must be equally distant from  and , it must be the
middle point of .

Cor. 1.-The line which bisects any chord of a circle
perpendicularly passes through the centre of the circle.

Cor. 2.-The locus of the centres of the circles which
pass through two fixed points is the line bisecting at
right angles that connecting the two points.

Cor. 3.-If , ,  be three points in the circumference
of a circle, the lines bisecting perpendicularly
the chords ,  intersect in the centre.



PROP. II.-Theorem.If any two points  be taken in the circumference
of a circle-1. The segment  of the indefinite line
through these points which lies between them falls within
the circle. 2. The remaining parts of the line are without
the circle.

1409f105

Dem.-1. Let  be the centre. Take any point 
in . Join .
Now the angle  is
[I. xvi.] greater than ;
but the angle  is equal
to  [I. v.], because the
triangle  is isosceles;
therefore the angle  is
greater than . Hence
 is greater than  [I. xix.]; therefore  is less
than the radius of the circle, consequently the point 
must be within the circle (note on I. Def. xxiii.).

In the same manner every other point between  and
 lies within the circle.
2. Take any point  in  produced either way.
Join . Then the angle  is greater than 
[I. xvi.]; therefore  is greater than . Hence
 is greater than , and the point  is without the
circle.

We have added the second part of this Proposition. The indirect
proof given of the first part in several editions of Euclid
is very inelegant; it is one of those absurd things which give
many students a dislike to Geometry.
footnotesize
Cor. 1.-Three collinear points cannot be concyclic.
Cor. 2.-A line cannot meet a circle in more than
two points.
Cor. 3.-The circumference of a circle is everywhere
concave towards the centre.


PROP. III.-Theorem.If a line  passing through the centre of a circle
bisect a chord , which does not pass through the centre,
it cuts it at right angles. 2. If it cuts it at right angles,
it bisects it.

11710f106

Dem.-1. Let  be the centre of the circle. Join
, . Then the triangles
,  have  equal to 
(hyp.),  common, and  equal
to , because they are radii of the
circle; hence [I. viii.] the angle
 is equal to , and they
are adjacent angles. Therefore
[I. Def. xiii.] each is a right
angle. Hence  cuts  at
right angles.

2. The same construction being made: because 
is equal to , the angle  is equal to  [I. v.],
and  is equal to  (hyp.), because each is
right. Therefore the triangles ,  have two
angles in one respectively equal to two angles in the
other, and the side  common. Hence [I. xxvi.] the
side  is equal to . Therefore  is bisected in .
2. May be proved as follows:-
*
&&OC^2 = OE^2 + &EC^2 [I. xlvii.], and  OD^2 = OE^2 + ED^2; 

&but&OC^2 = &OD^2;  OE^2 + EC^2 = OE^2 + ED^2. 

&Hence& &EC^2 = ED^2,  and  EC = ED.& Hence


Observation.-The three theorems, namely, Cor. 1., Prop. i.,
and Parts 1, 2, of Prop. iii., are so related, that any one being
proved directly, the other two follow by the Rule of Identity.
footnotesize
Cor. 1.-The line which bisects perpendicularly one
of two parallel chords of a circle bisects the other perpendicularly.


Cor. 2.-The locus of the middle points of a system
of parallel chords of a circle is the diameter of the
circle perpendicular to them all.

Cor. 3.-If a line intersect two concentric circles,
its intercepts between the circles are equal.

Cor. 4.-The line joining the centres of two intersecting
circles bisects their common chord perpendicularly.


Exercises.


1. If a chord of a circle subtend a right angle at a given
point, the locus of its middle point is a circle.

2. Every circle passing through a given point, and having its
centre on a given line, passes through another given point.

3. Draw a chord in a given circle which shall subtend a right
angle at a given point, and be parallel to a given line.
footnotesize


PROP. IV.-Theorem.Two chords of a circle  which are not both
diameters cannot bisect each other, though either may
bisect the other.

1159f107

Dem.-Let  be the centre. Let ,  intersect
in ; then since ,  are not
both diameters, join . If possible
let  be equal to , and
 equal to . Now, since 
passing through the centre bisects
, which does not pass through
the centre, it is at right angles to
it; therefore the angle  is
right. In like manner the angle
 is right. Hence  is equal to -that is,
a part equal to the whole-which is absurd. Therefore
 and  do not bisect each other.

Cor.-If two chords of a circle bisect each other,
they are both diameters.


PROP. V.-Theorem.If two circles  cut one another in any point
, they are not concentric.

1188f108

Dem.-If possible let them have a common centre at
. Join , and draw any other
line , cutting the circles in 
and  respectively. Then because
 is the centre of the circle ,
 is equal to . Again, because
 is the centre of the circle
,  is equal to . Hence
 is equal to -a part equal
to the whole-which is absurd.
Therefore the circles
are not concentric.

Exercises.


1. If two non-concentric circles intersect in one point, they must
intersect in another point. For, let ,  be the centres,  the
point of intersection; from  let fall the  on the line .
Produce  to , making : then  is another point of
intersection.

2. Two circles cannot have three points in common without
wholly coinciding.
footnotesize

PROP. VI.-Theorem.If one circle  touch another circle  internally
in any point , it is not concentric with it.1109f109

Dem.-If possible let the circles be concentric, and
let  be the centre of each. Join
, and draw any other line ,
cutting the circles in the points
,  respectively. Then because 
is the centre of each circle (hyp.),
 and  are each equal to ;
therefore  is equal to , which
is impossible. Hence the circles
cannot have the same centre.


PROP. VII.-Theorem.If from any point  within a circle, which is not the
centre, lines    c., one of which passes
through the centre, be drawn to the circumference, then-1.
The greatest is the line  which passes through the
centre. 2. The production  of this in the opposite
direction is the least. 3. Of the others, that which is
nearest to the line through the centre is greater than every
one more remote. 4. Any two lines making equal angles
with the diameter on opposite sides are equal. 5. More
than two equal right lines cannot be drawn from the given
point  to the circumference.

Dem.-1. Let  be the centre. Join . Now
since  is the centre,  is
equal to : to each add ,
and we have  equal to the
sum of , ; but the sum
of ,  is greater than
 [I. xx.]. Therefore  is
greater than .

12712f110

2. Join . Then [I. xx.]
the sum of ,  is greater
than ; but  is equal to
 [I. Def. xxx.]. Therefore
the sum of ,  is greater than . Reject ,
which is common, and we have  greater than .

3. Join ; then two triangles ,  have
the side  equal to  [I. Def. xxx.], and  common;
but the angle  is greater than ; therefore
[I. xxiv.] the base  is greater than . In
like manner  is greater than .

4. Make at the centre  the angle  equal to
. Join . Then the triangles ,  have
the two sides ,  in one respectively equal to the
sides ,  in the other, and the angle  equal to
the angle ; hence  is equal to  [I. iv.], and
the angle  equal to the angle . Therefore 
and  make equal angles with the diameter.

5. A third line cannot be drawn from  equal to
either of the equal lines , . If possible let 
be equal to , then  is equal to -that is, the
line which is nearest to the one through the centre is
equal to the one which is more remote, which is impossible.
Hence three equal lines cannot be drawn from
 to the circumference.

Cor. 1.-If two equal lines ,  be drawn from
a point  to the circumference of a circle, the diameter
through  bisects the angle  formed by these
lines.

Cor. 2.-If  be the common centre of circles whose
radii are , , , c., then-1. The circle whose
radius is the maximum line  lies outside the circle
, and touches it in  [Def. iv.]. 2. The circle
whose radius is the minimum line  lies inside the
circle , and touches it in . 3. A circle having
any of the remaining lines  as radius cuts 
in two points .

Observation.-Proposition vii. affords a good illustration of
the following important definition (see Sequel to Euclid, p. 13):-If
a geometrical magnitude varies its position continuously according
to any law, and if it retains the same value throughout,
it is said to be a constant, such as the radius of a circle revolving
round the centre; but if it goes on increasing for some time, and
then begins to decrease, it is said to be a maximum at the end of
the increase. Thus, in the foregoing figure, , supposed to
revolve round  and meet the circle, is a maximum. Again, if it
decreases for some time, and then begins to increase, it is a minimumat the commencement of the increase. Thus , supposed
as before to revolve round  and meet the circle, is a minimum.
Proposition viii. will give other illustrations.
footnotesize

PROP. VIII.-Theorem.If from any point  outside a circle, lines , , , c.
be drawn to the concave circumference,
then-1. The maximum is that which passes through the centre.
2. Of the others, that which is nearer to the one through
the centre is greater than the one more remote. Again, if
lines be drawn to the convex circumference-3. The minimum
is that whose production passes through the centre.
4. Of the others, that which is nearer to the minimum is
less than one more remote. 5. From the given point 
there can be drawn two equal lines to the concave or the
convex circumference, both of which make equal angles with
the line passing through the centre. 6. More than two
equal lines cannot be drawn from the given point  to
either circumference.16518f111

Dem.-1. Let  be the centre. Join . Now
since  is the centre,  is equal to : to each add
, and we have  equal to the sum of , ; but
the sum of ,  is greater than  [I. xx.]. Therefore
 is greater than .

2. Join , . The two triangles , 
have the side  equal
to , and  common,
and the angle 
greater than ; therefore
the base  is greater
than  [I. xxiv.]. In
like manner  is greater
than , c.

3. Join . Now in
the triangle  the
sum of the sides ,
 is greater than 
[I. xx.]; but  is equal
to  [I. Def. xxx.].
Reject them, and  will
remain greater than .

4. Join , . The two triangles , 
have two sides ,  in one respectively equal to
two sides ,  in the other; but the angle  is
greater than ; therefore [I. xxiv.] the base  is
greater than . In like manner  is greater than
.

5. Make the angle  equal  [I. xxiii.]. Join
. Now the triangles ,  have two sides ,
 in one respectively equal to two sides ,  in
the other, and the angle  equal to  (const.);
therefore [I. iv.]  is equal to .

6. A third line cannot be drawn from  equal to either
of the lines , . For if possible let  be equal to
; then  is equal to -that is, one which is
nearer to the minimum equal to one more remote-which
is impossible.

Cor. 1.-If  be produced to meet the circle again
in ,  is equal to .

Cor. 2.-If two equal lines be drawn from  to
either the convex or concave circumference, the diameter
through  bisects the angle between them,
and the parts of them intercepted by the circle are
equal.

Cor. 3.-If  be the common centre of circles whose
radii are lines drawn from  to the circumference of
, then-1. The circle whose radius is the minimum
line  has contact of the first kind with 
[Def. iv.]. 2. The circle whose radius is the maximum
line  has contact of the second kind. 3. A
circle having any of the remaining lines  as radius
intersects  in two points .


PROP. IX.-Theorem.A point  within a circle , from which more
than two equal lines c. can be drawn to
the circumference, is the centre.10810f112

Dem.-If  be not the centre, let  be the centre.
Join , and produce it to meet the
circle in  and ; then  is the
diameter, and  is a point in it
which is not the centre: therefore
[vii.] only two equal lines can be
drawn from  to the circumference;
but three equal lines are drawn
(hyp.), which is absurd. Hence 
must be the centre.

Or thus: Since the lines ,  are equal, the line bisecting
the angle  [vii. Cor. 1] must pass through the centre: in like
manner the line bisecting the angle  must pass through the
centre. Hence the point of intersection of these bisectors, that is,
the point , must be the centre.
footnotesize

PROP. X.-Theorem.If two circles have more than two points common, they
must coincide.

12010f113

Dem.-Let  be one of the circles; and if possible
let another circle  have three
points, , , , in common with
, without coinciding with it.
Find , the centre of . Join
, , . Then since  is the
centre of , the three lines ,
,  are equal to one another.

Again, since  is a circle and
 a point, from which three equal
lines , ,  can be drawn to its circumference,
 must be the centre of . Hence  and  are concentric,
which [v.] is impossible.

Cor.-Two circles not coinciding cannot have more
than two points common. Compare I., Axiom x., that
two right lines not coinciding cannot have more than
one point common.


PROP. XI.-Theorem.If one circle  touch another circle  internally
at any point , the line joining the centres must pass through that point.

11210f114

Dem.-Let  be the centre of . Join . I
say the centre of the smaller
circle is in the line . If not,
let it be in any other position such
as . Join , , and produce
 through  to meet the circles
in the points , . Now since 
is a point in the diameter of the
larger circle between the centre
and ,  is less than 
[vii. 2]; but  is equal to 
(hyp.), being radii of the smaller circle. Hence 
is less than ; which is impossible; consequently the
centre of the smaller circle must be in the line .
Let it be ; then we see that the line joining the centres
passes through the point .

Or thus: Since  is a line drawn from a point
within the circle  to the circumference, but not
forming part of the diameter through , the circle
whose centre is  and radius  cuts [vii., Cor. 2]
 in , but it touches it (hyp.) also in , which is
impossible. Hence the centre of the smaller circle 
must be in the line .

PROP. XII.-Theorem.If two circles  have external contact at any
point , the line joining their centres must pass through
that point.

1507f115

Dem.-Let  be the centre of one of the circles.
Join , and produce it to meet the second circle again
in . I say the centre of the second circle is in the
line . If not, let it be elsewhere, as at . Join
, intersecting the circles
in  and , and join .
Now since  is the centre
of the circle ,  is
equal to ; and since 
is the centre of the circle
,  is equal to .
Hence the sum of the lines ,  is equal to the
sum of the lines , ; but  is greater than the
sum of  and ; therefore  is greater than the
sum of , -that is, one side of a triangle greater
than the sum of the other two-which [I. xx.] is impossible.
Hence the centre of the second circle must be
in the line . Let it be , and we see that the line
through the centres passes through the point .

Or thus: Since  is a line drawn from a point without
the circle  to its circumference, and when produced
does not pass through the centre, the circle
whose centre is  and radius  must cut the circle
 in  [viii., Cor. 3]; but it touches it (hyp.) also
in , which is impossible. Hence the centre of the
second circle must be in the line .

Observation.-Propositions xi, xii., may both be included in
one enunciation as follows:-"If two circles touch each other at
any point, the centres and that point are collinear." And this
latter Proposition is a limiting case of the theorem given in Proposition iii.,
Cor. 4, that "The line joining the centres of two
intersecting circles bisects the common chord perpendicularly."

313f116

Suppose the circle whose centre is  and one of the points of
intersection  to remain fixed, while the second circle turns
round that point in such a manner that the second point of
intersection  becomes ultimately consecutive to ; then, since
the line  always bisects , we see that when  ultimately
becomes consecutive to , the line  passes through . In
consequence of the motion, the common chord will become in
the limit a tangent to each circle, as in the second diagram.-Comberousse,
Geometrie Plane, page 57.

Cor. 1.-If two circles touch each other, their point of contact
is the union of two points of intersection. Hence a contact
counts for two intersections.

1009f117
Cor. 2.-If two circles touch each other at any point, they
cannot have any other common point. For, since two circles
cannot have more than two points
common [x.], and that the point of contact
is equivalent to two common points,
circles that touch cannot have any
other point common. The following is
a formal proof of this Proposition:-Let
,  be the centres of the two circles,
 the point of contact, and let  lie
between  and ; take any other point
 in the circumference of . Join ;
then [vii.]  is greater than ; therefore the point  is
outside the circumference of the smaller circle. Hence  cannot
be common to both circles. In like manner, they cannot have
any other common point but .
footnotesize

PROP. XIII.-Theorem.Two circles cannot have double contact, that it, cannot
touch each other in two points.

1209f118

Dem.-1. If possible let two circles touch each
other at two points  and .
Now since the two circles touch
each other in , the line joining
their centres passes through 
[xi.]. In like manner, it passes
through . Hence the centres
and the points ,  are in one
right line; therefore  is a
diameter of each circle. Hence,
if  be bisected in ,  must be the centre of each
circle-that is, the circles are concentric-which [v.] is
impossible.

2. If two circles touched each other externally in
two distinct points, then [xii.] the line joining the
centres should pass through each point, which is impossible.

Or thus: Draw a line bisecting  at right angles.
Then this line [i., Cor. 1] must pass through the centre
of each circle, and therefore [xi. xii.] must pass through
each point of contact, which is impossible. Hence two
circles cannot have double contact.

This Proposition is an immediate inference from the theorem
[xii., Cor. 1], that a point of contact counts for two intersections,
for then two contacts would be equivalent to four intersections;
but there cannot be more than two intersections [x.]. It also
follows from Prop. xii., Cor. 2, that if two circles touch each
other in a point , they cannot have any other point common;
hence they cannot touch again in .
footnotesize

Exercises.


1. If a variable circle touch two fixed circles externally, the
difference of the distances of its centre from the centres of the
fixed circles is equal to the difference or the sum of their radii,
according as the contacts are of the same or of opposite species
(Def. iv.).

2. If a variable circle be touched by one of two fixed circles
internally, and touch the other fixed circle either externally or
internally, the sum of the distances of its centre from the centres
of the fixed circles is equal to the sum or the difference of their
radii, according as the contact with the second circle is of the first
or second kind.

3. If through the point of contact of two touching circles any
secant be drawn cutting the circles again in two points, the radii
drawn to these points are parallel.

4. If two diameters of two touching circles be parallel, the
lines from the point of contact to the extremities of one diameter
pass through the extremities of the other.
footnotesize

PROP. XIV.-Theorem.In equal circles-. equal chords  are equally
distant from the centre. . chords which are equally
distant from the centre are equal.

10810f119

Dem.-1. Let  be the centre. Draw the perpendiculars
, . Join , .
Then because  is a chord in a
circle, and  is drawn from the
centre cutting it at right angles,
it bisects it [iii.]; therefore 
is the half of . In like manner,
 is the half of ; but 
is equal to  (hyp.). Therefore
 is equal to  [I., Axiom vii.].
And because  is a right angle,  is equal to . In like manner,  is equal to ;
but  is equal to . Therefore  is
equal to ; and  has been proved equal to
. Hence  is equal to ; therefore  is
equal to . Hence ,  are (Def. vi.) equally
distant from the centre.

2. Let  be equal to , it is required to prove 
equal to . The same construction being made, we
have, as before,  equal to ; but 
is equal to  (hyp.). Hence  is equal to ,
and  is equal to ; but  is double of , and
 double of . Therefore  is equal to .

Exercise.


If a chord of given length slide round a fixed circle-1. the
locus of its middle point is a circle; 2. the locus of any point
fixed in the chord is a circle.
footnotesize

PROP. XV.-Theorem.The diameter  is the greatest chord in a circle;
and of the others, the chord  which is nearer to
the centre is greater than  one more remote, and
the greater is nearer to the centre than the less.

1209f120

Dem.-1. Join , , , and draw the perpendiculars
, ; then because
 is the centre,  is equal to
 [I., Def. xxxii.], and  is
equal to . Hence  is equal
to the sum of  and ; but
the sum of ,  is greater
than  [I. xx.]. Therefore 
is greater than .

2. Because the chord  is nearer to the centre
than ,  is less than ; and since the triangles
,  are right-angled, we have ,
and ; therefore ;
but  is less than ; therefore  is greater
than , and  is greater than , but  and 
are the doubles of  and . Hence  is greater
than .

3. Let  be greater than , it is required to
prove that  is less than .

As before, we have  equal to ;
but  is greater than ; therefore  is less
than . Hence  is less than .

Exercises.


1. The shortest chord which can be drawn through a given
point within a circle is the perpendicular to the diameter which
passes through that point.

2. Through a given point, within or without a given circle,
draw a chord of length equal to that of a given chord.

3. Through one of the points of intersection of two circles
draw a secant-1. the sum of whose segments intercepted by the
circles shall be a maximum; 2. which shall be of any length
less than that of the maximum.

4. Three circles touch each other externally at , , ; the
chords ,  of two of them are produced to meet the third
again in the points  and ; prove that  is a diameter of the
third circle, and parallel to the line joining the centres of the
others.
footnotesize

PROP. XVI.-Theorem.. The perpendicular  to the diameter  of a
circle at its extremity  touches the circle at that point.
. Any other line  through the same point cuts the
circle.

12510f121

Dem.-1. Take any point , and join it to the centre
. Then because the angle 
is a right angle,  is equal to
 [I. xlvii.]; therefore
 is greater than . Hence
 is greater than , and the
point  [note on I., Def. xxxii.]
is without the circle. In like
manner, every other point in
, except , is without the
circle. Hence, since  meets
the circle at , but does not cut it, it must touch it.

2. To prove that , which is not perpendicular to
, cuts the circle. Draw  perpendicular to .
Now  is equal to . Therefore  is
greater than , and  is greater than . Hence
[note on I., Def. xxxii.] the point  must be within
the circle, and consequently the line  produced
must meet the circle again, and must therefore cut it.

This Proposition may be proved as follows:

At every point on a circle the tangent is perpendicular
to the radius.


*4
967f122
Let  and  be two consecutive points on the circumference.
Join , , ;
produce  both ways. Now since
 and  are consecutive points, 
is a tangent (Def. iii.). Again, the
sum of the three angles of the triangle
 is equal to two right
angles; but the angle  is infinitely
small, and the others are equal.
Hence each of them is a right angle. Therefore the
tangent is perpendicular to the diameter.

Or thus: A tangent is a limiting position of a secant,
namely, when the secant moves out until the two
points of intersection with the circle become consecutive;
but the line through the centre which bisects
the part of the secant within the circle [iii.] is perpendicular
to it. Hence, in the limit the tangent is
perpendicular to the line from the centre to the point
of contact.

Or again: The angle  is always equal to ;
hence, when  and  come together each is a right
angle, and the tangent is perpendicular to the radius.

Exercises.


1. If two circles be concentric, all chords of the greater which
touch the lesser are equal.

2. Draw a parallel to a given line to touch a given circle.

3. Draw a perpendicular to a given line to touch a given
circle.

4. Describe a circle having its centre at a given point-1. and
touching a given line; 2. and touching a given circle. How
many solutions of this case?

5. Describe a circle of given radius that shall touch two given
lines. How many solutions?

6. Find the locus of the centres of a system of circles touching
two given lines.

7. Describe a circle of given radius that shall touch a given
circle and a given line, or that shall touch two given circles.
footnotesize

PROP. XVII.-Problem.From a given point  without a given circle  to
draw a tangent to the circle.

295f123

Sol.-Let  (fig. 1) be the centre of the given circle.
Join , cutting the circumference in . With  as
centre, and  as radius, describe the circle .
Erect  at right angles to . Join , intersecting
the circle  in . Join ; it will be the
tangent required.

Dem.-Since  is the centre of the two circles,
we have  equal to , and  equal to .
Hence the two triangles ,  have the sides
,  in one respectively equal to the sides , 
in the other, and the contained angle common to both.
Hence [I. iv.] the angle  is equal to ; but
 is a right angle (const.); therefore  is a
right angle, and [xvi.]  touches the circle at .

Cor.-If  (fig. 2) be produced to ,  joined,
cutting the circle  in , and the line  drawn,
 will be another tangent from .

Exercises.


1. The two tangents ,  (fig. 2) are equal to one another,
because the square of each is equal to the square of  minus the
square of the radius.

2. If two circles be concentric, all tangents to the inner from
points on the outer are equal.

3. If a quadrilateral be circumscribed to a circle, the sum
of one pair of opposite sides is equal to the sum of the other
pair.

4. If a parallelogram be circumscribed to a circle it must be
a lozenge, and its diagonals intersect in the centre.

5. If  be joined, intersecting  in ,  is perpendicular
to .

6. The locus of the intersection of two equal tangents to two
circles is a right line (called the radical axis of the two circles).

7. Find a point such that tangents from it to three given circles
shall be equal. (This point is called the radical centre of the three
circles.)

8. The rectangle  is equal to the square of the radius.

Def. Two points, such as  and , the rectangle of whose
distances ,  from the centre is equal to the square of the
radius, are called inverse points with respect to the circle.

9. The intercept made on a variable tangent by two fixed tangents
subtends a constant angle at the centre.

10. Draw a common tangent to two circles. Hence, show how
to draw a line cutting two circles, so that the intercepted chords
shall be of given lengths.
footnotesize

PROP. XVIII.-TheoremIf a line  touch a circle, the line  from the centre
to the point of contact is perpendicular to it.

13511f124

Dem.-If not, suppose another line  drawn from
the centre to be perpendicular
to . Let  cut the
circle in . Then because
the angle  is right (hyp.)
the angle  [I. xvii.]
must be acute. Therefore
[I. xix.]  is greater than
; but  is equal to 
[I. Def. xxxii.]; therefore
 is greater than -that
is, a part greater than the
whole, which is impossible. Hence  must be perpendicular
to .

Or thus: Since the perpendicular must be the shortest line
from  to , and  is evidently the shortest line; therefore
 must be perpendicular to .

PROP. XIX.-Theorem.If a line  be a tangent to a circle, the line 
drawn at right angles to it from the point of contact passes
through the centre.

13011f125

If the centre be not in , let  be the centre.
Join . Then because 
touches the circle, and  is
drawn from the centre to the
point of contact,  is at right
angles to  [xviii.]; therefore
the angle  is right,
and the angle  is right
(hyp.); therefore  is equal
to -a part equal to the
whole, which is impossible.
Hence the centre must be in the line .


Cor.-If a number of circles touch the same line at
the same point, the locus of their centres is the perpendicular
to the line at the point.

Observation.-Propositions xvi., xviii., xix., are so related
that any two can be inferred from the third by the "Rule of
Identity." Hence it would, in strict logic, be sufficient to prove
any one of the three, and the others would follow. Again, these
three theorems are limiting cases of Proposition i., Cor. 1., and
Parts 1, 2, of Proposition iii., namely, when the points in which
the chord cuts the circle become consecutive.

PROP. XX.-Theorem.The angle  at the centre  of a circle is double
the angle  at the circumference standing on the
same arc.

325f126

Dem.-Join , and produce it to . Then because
 is equal to , the angle  is equal to ;
but the angle  is equal to the sum of the two
angles , . Hence the angle  is double
the angle . In like manner the angle  is
double the angle . Hence (by adding in figs. (),
(), and subtracting in ()), the angle  is double of
the angle .
Cor.-If  be a straight line,  will be a
right angle-that is, the angle in a semicircle is a right
angle (compare xxxi.).

PROP. XXI.-Theorem.The angles  in the same segment of a circle
are equal.

235f127

Dem.-Let  be the centre. Join , . Then
the angle  is double of the angle  [xx.], and
also double of the angle . Therefore the angle
 is equal to the angle .

The following is the proof of the second part-that
is, when the arc  is not greater than a semicircle,
without using angles greater than two right angles:-

1159f128

Let  be the centre. Join , and produce it to meet
the circle again in . Join .
Now since  is the centre, the
segment  is greater than a
semicircle; hence, by the first
case, fig. (), the angle  is
equal to . In like manner
the angle  is equal to .
Hence the whole angle  is
equal to the whole angle .

Cor. 1.-If two triangles ,  on the same
base , and on the same side of it, have equal vertical
angles, the four points , , ,  are concyclic.

Cor. 2.-If ,  be two fixed points, and if  varies
its position in such a way that the angle  retains
the same value throughout, the locus of  is a circle.

In other words-Given the base of a triangle and the
vertical angle, the locus of the vertex is a circle.

Exercises.


1. Given the base of a triangle and the vertical angle, find the
locus-

3em
5em
(1) of the intersection of its perpendiculars;

5em
(2) of the intersection of the internal bisectors of its base
angles;

5em
(3) of the intersection of the external bisectors of the base
angles;

5em
(4) of the intersection of the external bisector of one base
angle and the internal bisector of the other.


2. If the sum of the squares of two lines be given, their sum
is a maximum when the lines are equal.

3. Of all triangles having the same base and vertical angle, the
sum of the sides of an isosceles triangle is a maximum.

4. Of all triangles inscribed in a circle, the equilateral triangle
has the maximum perimeter.

5. Of all concyclic figures having a given number of sides, the
area is a maximum when the sides are equal.
footnotesize

PROP. XXII.-Theorem.The sum of the opposite angles of a quadrilateral 
inscribed in a circle is two right angles.

225f129

Dem.-Join , . The angle  is equal to
, being in the same segment  [xxi.]; and
the angle  is equal to , because they are in
the same segment . Hence the whole angle 
is equal to the sum of the two angles , . To
each add the angle , and we have the sum of the
two angles ,  equal to the sum of the three
angles , ,  of the triangle ; but the
sum of the three angles of a triangle is equal to two
right angles [I. xxxii.]. Therefore the sum of ,
 is two right angles.

Or thus: Let  be the centre of the circle. Join
,  (see fig. 2). Now the angle  is double of
 [xx.], and the angle  is double of .
Hence the sum of the angles [I. Def. ix., note]
,  is double of the sum of the angles ,
; but the sum of two angles ,  is four
right angles. Therefore the sum of the angles ,
 is two right angles.

Or again: Let  be the centre (fig. 2). Join , 
, . Then the four triangles , , ,
 are each isosceles. Hence the angle  is
equal to the angle , and the angle  equal to
the angle ; therefore the angle  is equal to
the sum of the angles , . In like manner
the angle  is equal to the sum of the angles ,
. Hence the sum of the two angles , 
is equal to the sum of the two angles , , and
hence each sum is two right angles.

Cor.-If a parallelogram be inscribed in a circle it is
a rectangle.

Exercises.


1. If the opposite angles of a quadrilateral be supplemental, it
is cyclic.

2. If a figure of six sides be inscribed in a circle, the sum of
any three alternate angles is four right angles.

3. A line which makes equal angles with one pair of opposite
sides of a cyclic quadrilateral, makes equal angles with the remaining
pair and with the diagonals.

4. If two opposite sides of a cyclic quadrilateral be produced to
meet, and a perpendicular be let fall on the bisector of the angle
between them from the point of intersection of the diagonals, this
perpendicular will bisect the angle between the diagonals.

5. If two pairs of opposite sides of a cyclic hexagon be respectively
parallel to each other, the remaining pair of sides are also
parallel.

6. If two circles intersect in the points , , and any two lines
, , be drawn through  and , cutting one of the circles
in the points , , and the other in the points , , the line 
is parallel to .

7. If equilateral triangles be described on the sides of any
triangle, the lines joining the vertices of the original triangle
to the opposite vertices of the equilateral triangles are concurrent.

8. In the same case prove that the centres of the circles described
about the equilateral triangles form another equilateral
triangle.

9. If a quadrilateral be described about a circle, the angles at
the centre subtended by the opposite sides are supplemental.

10. The perpendiculars of a triangle are concurrent.

11. If a variable tangent meets two parallel tangents it subtends
a right angle at the centre.

12. The feet of the perpendiculars let fall on the sides of a
triangle from any point in the circumference of the circumscribed
circle are collinear (Simson).

Def.-The line of collinearity is called Simson's line.

13. If a hexagon be circumscribed about a circle, the sum of
the angles subtended at the centre by any three alternate sides is
equal to two right angles.
footnotesize

PROP. XXIII-Theorem.Two similar segments of circles which do not coincide
cannot be constructed on the same chord , and on the
same side of that chord.

1455f130

Dem.-If possible, let , , be two similar
segments constructed on the same side of . Take
any point  in the inner one. Join , and produce
it to meet the outer one in .
Join , . Then since
the segments are similar,
the angle  is equal to
 (Def. x.), which is impossible
[I. xvi.]. Hence two similar segments not coinciding
cannot be described on the same chord and on the
same side of it.

PROP. XXIV.-Theorem.Similar segments of circles  on equal chords
 are equal to one another.

300f131

Dem.-Since the lines are equal, if  be applied
to , so that the point  will coincide with , and
the line  with , the point  shall coincide with
; and because the segments are similar, they must
coincide [xxiii.]. Hence they are equal.

This demonstration may be stated as follows:-Since the chords
are equal, they are congruent; and therefore the segments, being
similar, must be congruent.
footnotesize

PROP. XXV.-Problem.An arc  of a circle being given, it is required to
describe the whole circle.

Sol.-Take any three points , ,  in the arc.
Join , . Bisect  in , and  in . Erect
,  at right angles to , ; then , the point
of intersection, will be the centre of the circle.


1086f132

Dem.-Because  bisects the chord  and is perpendicular
to it, it passes through
the centre [i., Cor. 1]. In like
manner  passes through the
centre. Hence the point  must be
the centre; and the circle described
from  as centre, with  as radius,
will be the circle required.


PROP. XXVI.-Theorem.


The four Propositions xxvi.-xxix. are so like in their enunciations
that students frequently substitute one for another. The
following scheme will assist in remembering them:-

tabular@c@  *6l@  c
In Proposition & xxvi. are & given & angles & , to & prove & arcs & , 

  " & xxvii.  & " & arcs   & , & " & angles & , 

  " & xxviii. & " & chords & , & " & arcs   & , 

  " & xxix.   & " & arcs   & , & " & chords & ;
 

so that Proposition xxvii. is the converse of xxvi., and xxix. of
xxviii.
footnotesize

In equal circles , equal angles at the
centres  or at the circumferences 
stand upon equal arcs.

1909f133

Dem.-1. Suppose the angles at the centres to be
given equal. Now because the circles are equal their
radii are equal (Def. i.).
Therefore the
two triangles ,
 have the sides
,  in one respectively
equal to
the sides , 
in the other, and the
angle  equal to
 (hyp.). Therefore [I. iv.] the base  is equal
to .

Again, since the angles ,  are [xx.] the
halves of the equal angles , , they are equal
[I. Axiom vii.]. Therefore (Def. x.) the segments
,  are similar, and their chords ,  have
been proved equal; therefore [xxiv.] the segments are
equal. And taking these equals from the whole circles,
which are equal (hyp.), the remaining segments ,
 are equal. Hence the arcs ,  are equal.

2. The demonstration of this case is included in the
foregoing.

Cor. 1.-If the opposite angles of a cyclic quadrilateral
be equal, one of its diagonals must be a diameter
of the circumscribed circle.

Cor. 2.-Parallel chords in a circle intercept equal
arcs.

Cor. 3.-If two chords intersect at any point within
a circle, the sum of the opposite arcs which they intercept
is equal to the arc which parallel chords intersecting
on the circumference intercept. 2. If they
intersect without the circle, the difference of the arcs
they intercept is equal to the arc which parallel chords
intersecting on the circumference intercept.

Cor. 4.-If two chords intersect at right angles, the
sum of the opposite arcs which they intercept on the
circle is a semicircle.

PROP. XXVII.-Theorem.In equal circles , angles at the centres
, or at the circumferences ,
which stand on equal arcs , are equal.

1909f134

Dem.-If possible let one of them, such as ,
be greater than the
other, ; and
suppose a part such
as  to be equal
to . Then since
the circles are equal,
and the angles ,
 at the centres
are equal (hyp.), the
arc  is equal to  [xxvi.]; but  is equal to 
(hyp.). Hence  is equal to -that is, a part
equal to the whole, which is absurd. Therefore the
angle  is equal to .

2. The angles at the circumference, being the halves of
the central angles, are therefore equal.

PROP. XXVIII.-Theorem.In equal circles  , equal chords 
divide the circumferences into arcs, which are equal each
to each-that is, the lesser to the lesser, and the greater to
the greater.1909f135

Dem.-If the equal chords be diameters, the Proposition
is evident. If
not, let ,  be the
centres. Join ,
, , ; then
because the circles
are equal their radii
are equal (Def. i.).
Hence the two triangles
, 
have the sides ,  in one respectively equal to
the sides ,  in the other, and the base  is
equal to  (hyp.). Therefore [I. viii.] the angle
 is equal to . Hence the arc  is equal
to  [xxvi.]; and since the whole circumference
 is equal to the whole circumference ,
the remaining arc  is equal to the remaining arc
.

Exercises.


1. The line joining the feet of perpendiculars from any point
in the circumference of a circle, on two diameters given in position,
is given in magnitude.

2. If a line of given length slide between two lines given in
position, the locus of the intersection of perpendiculars to the
given lines at its extremities is a circle. (This is the converse
of 1.)
footnotesize

PROP. XXIX.-Theorem.In equal circles , equal arcs 
are subtended by equal chords.

Dem.-Let ,  be the centres (see last fig.). Join
, , , ; then because the circles are equal,
the angles ,  at the centres, which stand on
the equal arcs , , are equal [xxvii.]. Again,
because the triangles ,  have the two sides
,  in one respectively equal to the two sides ,
 in the other, and the angle  equal to the angle
, the base  of one is equal to the base  of the
other.

Observation.-Since the two circles in the four last Propositions
are equal, they are congruent figures, and the truth of the
Propositions is evident by superposition.
footnotesize

PROP. XXX.-Problem.To bisect a given arc .

Sol.-Draw the chord ; bisect it in ; erect 
at right angles to , meeting the arc in ; then the
arc is bisected in .

1206f136

Dem.-Join , . Then
the triangles ,  have
the side  equal to  (const.),
and  common to both, and
the angle  equal to the
angle , each being right. Hence the base  is
equal to the base . Therefore [xxviii.] the arc 
is equal to the arc . Hence the arc  is bisected
in .

Exercises.


1.  is a semicircle whose diameter is ; the chord 
produced meets  produced in : prove that if  is equal to
the radius, the arc  is equal to three times .

2. The internal and the external bisectors of the vertical angle
of a triangle inscribed in a circle meet the circumference again in
points equidistant from the extremities of the base.

3. If from , one of the points of intersection of two given
circles, two chords ,  be drawn, cutting the circles in
the points , ; , , the triangles , , formed by
joining these to the second point  of intersection of the circles,
are equiangular.

4. If the vertical angle  of a triangle inscribed in a circle
be bisected by a line , which meets the circle again in , and
from  perpendiculars ,  be drawn to the sides, one of
which must be produced: prove that  is equal to , and
hence show that  is equal to half the sum of , .
footnotesize


PROP. XXXI.-Theorem.In a circle-. The angle in a semicircle is a right
angle. . The angle in a segment greater than a semicircle
is an acute angle. . The angle in a segment less
than a semicircle is an obtuse angle.

14013f137

Dem.-(1). Let  be the diameter,  any point in
the semicircle. Join , .
The angle  is a right angle.

For let  be the centre.
Join , and produce  to
. Then because  is equal
to , the angle  is equal
to the angle . In like
manner, the angle  is
equal to . Hence the
angle  is equal to the
sum of the two angles ,
; but [I. xxxii.] the
angle  is equal to the sum of the two interior
angles ,  of the triangle . Hence the
angle  is equal to its adjacent angle , and
therefore it is a right angle [I. Def. xiii.].

(2). Let the arc  be greater than a semicircle.
Join . Then the angle  is evidently less than
; but  is right; therefore  is acute.


(3). Let the arc  be less than a semicircle; then
evidently, from (1), the angle  is obtuse.

Cor. 1.-If a parallelogram be inscribed in a circle,
its diagonals intersect at the centre of the circle.

Cor. 2.-Find the centre of a circle by means of a
carpenter's square.

Cor. 3.-From a point outside a circle draw two
tangents to the circle.

PROP. XXXII.-Theorem.If a line  be a tangent to a circle, and from the
point of contact  a chord  be drawn cutting the
circle, the angles made by this line with the tangent are
respectively equal to the angles in the alternate segments
of the circle.

14311f138

Dem.-(1). If the chord passes through the centre,
the Proposition is evident,
for the angles are right
angles; but if not, from the
point of contact  draw 
at right angles to the tangent.
Join . Then because 
is a tangent to the circle,
and  is drawn from the
point of contact perpendicular
to ,  passes through
this centre [xix.]. Therefore
the angle  is right [xxxi.]. Hence the sum of the
two remaining angles ,  is one right angle;
but the angle  is right (const.); therefore the sum
of the angles ,  is equal to . Reject
, which is common, and we get the angle 
equal to the angle .

(2). Take any point  in the arc . It is required
to prove that the angle  is equal to .

13012f139

Since the quadrilateral  is cyclic, the sum of
the opposite angles ,  is two right angles
[xxii.], and therefore equal to the sum of the angles
, ; but the angles ,  are equal (1).
Reject them, and we get the angle  equal to
.

Or thus: Take any point
 in the semicircle .
Join , , . Then the
angle , each being
right, and  [xxi.].
Therefore the remaining angle
. Again, join ,
. The angle ,
each being right, and  [xxi.]. Hence the angle
.-Lardner.
1209f140

Or by the method of limits, see Townsend's Modern
Geometry, vol. i., page 14.

The angle  is equal to
 [xxi.]. Now let the point
 move until it becomes consecutive
to ; then  will be
a tangent, and  will coincide
with , and the angle 
with . Hence, if  be
a tangent at ,  any chord,
the angle which the tangent makes with the chord is equal
to the angle in the alternate segment.

Exercises.


1. If two circles touch, any line drawn through the point of
contact will cut off similar segments.

2. If two circles touch, and any two lines be drawn through the
point of contact, cutting both circles again, the chord connecting
their points of intersection with one circle is parallel to the chord
connecting their points of intersection with the other circle.

3.  is an arc of a circle,  a tangent at , meeting the
chord  produced in , and  a perpendicular to  in :
prove, if  be bisected in , that the arc .

4. If two circles touch at a point , and  be a chord
through , meeting the circles in  and : prove that the tangents
at  and  are parallel to each other, and that when one
circle is within the other, the tangent at  meets the outer circle
in two points equidistant from .

5. If two circles touch externally, their common tangent at
either side subtends a right angle at the point of contact, and its
square is equal to the rectangle contained by their diameters.
footnotesize

PROP. XXXIII.-Problem.On a given right line  to describe a segment of a
circle which shall contain an angle equal to a given rectilineal
angle .

Sol.-If  be a right angle, describe a semicircle on
the given line, and the thing required is done; for the
angle in a semicircle is a right angle.

290f141

If not, make with the given line  the angle 
equal to . Erect  at right angles to , and 
at right angles to . On  as diameter describe a
circle: it will be the circle required.

Dem.-The circle on  as diameter passes through
, since the angle  is right [xxxi.] and touches
, since the angle  is right [xvi.]. Therefore
the angle  [xxxii.] is equal to the angle in the
alternate segment; but the angle  is equal to the
angle  (const.). Therefore the angle  is equal to
the angle in the segment described on .

Exercises.


1. Construct a triangle, being given base, vertical angle, and
any of the following data:-1. Perpendicular. 2. The sum or
difference of the sides. 3. Sum or difference of the squares of
the sides. 4. Side of the inscribed square on the base. 5. The
median that bisects the base.

2. If lines be drawn from a fixed point to all the points of the
circumference of a given circle, the locus of all their points of
bisection is a circle.

3. Given the base and vertical angle of a triangle, find the
locus of the middle point of the line joining the vertices of
equilateral triangles described on the sides.

4. In the same case, find the loci of the angular points of a
square described on one of the sides.
footnotesize

PROP. XXXIV.-Problem.To cut off from a given circle  a segment which
shall contain an angle equal to a given angle .

1409f142

Sol.-Take any point  in the circumference. Draw
the tangent , and make the
angle  equal to the given
angle .  will cut off the
required segment.

Dem.-Take any point 
in the alternate segment.
Join , . Then the
angle  is equal to 
[xxxii.]; but  is equal
to  (const.). Therefore the angle  is equal to .

PROP. XXXV.-Theorem.If two chords  of a circle intersect in a point
 within the circle, the rectangles 
contained by the segments are equal.

1159f143

Dem.-1. If the point of intersection be the centre,
each rectangle is equal to the square of the radius.
Hence they are equal.

2. Let one of the chords  pass through the centre
, and cut the other chord , which does not pass
through the centre, at right angles. Join . Now
because  passes through the centre, and cuts the
other chord , which does not
pass through the centre at right
angles, it bisects it [iii.]. Again,
because  is divided equally in
 and unequally in , the rectangle
, together with ,
is equal to -that is, to 
[II. v.]; but  is equal to  [I. xlvii.] Therefore



Reject , which is common, and we have ; but  is equal to the rectangle ,
since  is equal to . Therefore the rectangle
 is equal to the rectangle .

1108f144

3. Let  pass through the centre, and cut ,
which does not pass through the
centre obliquely. Let  be the
centre. Draw  perpendicular to
 [I. xi.]. Join , . Then,
since  is cut at right angles by
, which passes through the centre,
it is bisected in  [iii.], and divided
unequally in . Hence
*
&&           CE.ED + FE^2 &= FD^2  [II. v.],  &&

&and &        OF^2 &= OF^2.  &and&
Hence, adding, since  [I. xlvii.], and
, we get



Again, since  is bisected in  and divided unequally
in ,
*
&&           AE.EB + OE^2 &= OB^2  [II. v.].  &&

&Therefore &  CE.ED + OE^2 &= AE.EB + OE^2.  &Therefore&

&Hence &               CE.ED &= AE.EB.  &&


11210f145

4. Let neither chord pass through the centre.
Through the point , where they
intersect, draw the diameter .
Then by 3, the rectangle 
is equal to the rectangle ,
and also to the rectangle .
Hence the rectangle  is
equal to the rectangle .

Cor. 1.-If a chord of a circle
be divided in any point within
the circle, the rectangle contained by its segments is
equal to the difference between the square of the
radius and the square of the line drawn from the
centre to the point of section.

Cor. 2.-If the rectangle contained by the segments
of one of two intersecting lines be equal to the rectangle
contained by the segments of the other, the four
extremities are concyclic.

Cor. 3.-If two triangles be equiangular, the rectangle
contained by the non-corresponding
sides about any two equal angles are
equal.

*4
1009f146
Let ,  be the equiangular
triangles, and let them be
placed so that the equal angles at
 may be vertically opposite, and
that the non-corresponding sides
,  may be in one line; then
the non-corresponding sides ,  shall be in one
line. Now, since the angle  is equal to , the
points , , ,  are concyclic [xxi., Cor. 1]. Hence
the rectangle  is equal to the rectangle 
[xxxv.].

Exercises.


1. In any triangle, the rectangle contained by two sides is
equal to the rectangle contained by the perpendicular on the third
side and the diameter of the circumscribed circle.

Def.-The supplement of an arc is the difference between it and
a semicircle.

2. The rectangle contained by the chord of an arc and the
chord of its supplement is equal to the rectangle contained by
the radius and the chord of twice the supplement.

3. If the base of a triangle be given, and the sum of the sides,
the rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from the extremities
of the base on the external bisector of the vertical angle is given.

4. If the base and the difference of the sides be given, the
rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from the extremities
of the base on the internal bisector is given.

5. Through one of the points of intersection of two circles
draw a secant, so that the rectangle contained by the intercepted
chords may be given, or a maximum.

13516f147

6. If the sum of two arcs, ,  of a circle be less than a
semicircle, the rectangle 
contained by their chords is equal
to the rectangle contained by the
radius, and the excess of the chord
of the supplement of their difference
above the chord of the supplement of
their sum.-Catalan.

Dem.-Draw , the diameter
which is perpendicular to , and
draw the chords ,  parallel
to . Now it is evident that the
difference between the arcs , 
is equal to , and therefore
. Hence the arc 
is the supplement of the difference, and  is the chord of that
supplement. Again, since the angle  is right, the arc 
is a semicircle. Hence  is the supplement of the sum of the
arcs , ; therefore the line  is the chord of the supplement
of the sum. Now (Ex. 1), the rectangle  is equal
to the rectangle contained by the diameter and , and therefore
equal to the rectangle contained by the radius and ; but the
difference between  and  is evidently equal to . Hence
the rectangle  is equal to the rectangle contained by the
radius and the difference between the chords , .

7. If we join ,  we find, as before, the rectangle 
equal to the rectangle contained by the radius and -that
is, equal to the rectangle contained by the radius and the sum of
 and . Hence-If the sum of two arcs of a circle be greater
than a semicircle, the rectangle contained by their chords is equal to
the rectangle contained by the radius, and the sum of the chords of
the supplements of their sum and their difference.

8. Through a given point draw a transversal cutting two lines
given in position, so that the rectangle contained by the segments
intercepted between it and the line may be given.
footnotesize

PROP. XXXVI.-Theorem.If from any point  without a circle two lines be drawn
to it, one of which  is a tangent, and the other  a
secant, the rectangle  contained by the segments
of the secant is equal to the square of the tangent.

1609f148

Dem.-1. Let  pass through the centre . Join
. Then because  is
bisected in  and divided
externally in , the rectangle
 is
equal to  [II. vi.].
But since  is a tangent,
and  drawn from the
centre to the point of
contact, the angle 
is right [xviii.]. Hence  is equal to .
*
&Therefore&
  AP.BP + OB^2 &= OT^2 + PT^2;
&Therefore&


&but &  OB^2 &= OT^2.  &&

&2Hence the rectangle              &= PT^2.  &&

1679f149

2. If  does not pass through the centre , let fall
the perpendicular 
on . Join , ,
. Then because ,
a line through the centre,
cuts , which does
not pass through the
centre at right angles,
it bisects it [iii.].
Hence, since  is bisected
in  and divided
externally in , the rectangle
*
&&  AP.BP + CB^2 &= CP^2  [II. vi.];  &&

&and &  OC^2 &= OC^2.  &and &
Hence, adding, since  [I. xlvii.], and
, we get
*
&rectangle &  AP.BP + OB^2 &= OP^2;  &&

&but &  OT^2 + PT^2 &= OP^2  [I. xlvii.]. &&

&Therefore&  AP.BP + OB^2 &= OT^2 + PT^2;

and rejecting the equals  and , we have the
rectangle





The two Propositions xxxv., xxxvi., may be included in one
enunciation, as follows:-The rectangle  contained by the
segments of any chord of a given circle passing through a fixed point
, either within or without the circle, is constant. For let  be
the centre: join , , . Then  is an isosceles triangle,
and  is a line drawn from its vertex to a point  in the base,
or base produced. Then the rectangle  is equal to the
difference of the squares of  and , and is therefore constant.
footnotesize

Cor. 1.-If two lines ,  produced meet in ,
and if the rectangle , the points
, , ,  are concyclic (compare xxxv., Cor. 2).

Cor. 2.-Tangents to two circles from any point in
their common chord are equal (compare xvii., Ex. 6).

Cor. 3.-The common chords of any three intersecting
circles are concurrent (compare xvii., Ex. 7).

Exercise.


If from the vertex  of a ,  be drawn, meeting
 produced in , and making the angle , prove
.
footnotesize

PROP. XXXVII.-Theorem.If the rectangle  contained by the segments of
a secant, drawn from any point  without a circle, be
equal to the square of a line  drawn from the same
point to meet the circle, the line which meets the circle is
a tangent.

17510f150

Dem.-From  draw  touching the circle [xvii.].
Let  be the centre.
Join , , .
Now the rectangle
 is equal to the
square on  (hyp.),
and equal to the square
on  [xxxvi.]. Hence
 is equal to ,
and therefore  is
equal to . Again,
the triangles ,  have the side  equal ,
 equal , and the base  common; hence [I. viii.]
the angle  is equal to ; but  is a right
angle, since  is a tangent [xviii.]; hence  is
right, and therefore [xvi.]  is a tangent.

Exercises.


1. Describe a circle passing through two given points, and
fulfilling either of the following conditions: 1, touching a given
line; 2, touching a given circle.

2. Describe a circle through a given point, and touching two
given lines; or touching a given file and a given circle.

3. Describe a circle passing through a given point, having its
centre on a given line and touching a given circle.

4. Describe a circle through two given points, and intercepting
a given arc on a given circle.

5. , , ,  are four collinear points, and  is a common
tangent to the circles described upon ,  as diameters:
prove that the triangles ,  are equiangular.

6. The diameter of the circle inscribed in a right-angled triangle
is equal to half the sum of the diameters of the circles
touching the hypotenuse, the perpendicular from the right angle
of the hypotenuse, and the circle described about the right-angled
triangle.
footnotesize

Questions for Examination on Book III.


1. What is the subject-matter of Book III.?

2. Define equal circles.

3. What is the difference between a chord and a secant?

4. When does a secant become a tangent?

5. What is the difference between a segment of a circle and
a sector?

6. What is meant by an angle in a segment?

7. If an arc of a circle be one-sixth of the whole circumference,
what is the magnitude of the angle in it?

8. What are linear segments?

9. What is meant by an angle standing on a segment?

10. What are concyclic points?

11. What is a cyclic quadrilateral?

12. How many intersections can a line and a circle have?

13. What does the line become when the points of intersection
become consecutive?

14. How many points of intersection can two circles have?

15. What is the reason that if two circles touch they cannot
have any other common point?

16. Give one enunciation that will include Propositions xi.,
xii. of Book III.

17. What Proposition is this a limiting case of?

18. Explain the extended meaning of the word angle.

19. What is Euclid's limit of an angle?

20. State the relations between Propositions xvi., xviii., xix.

21. What Propositions are these limiting cases of?

22. How many common tangents can two circles have?

23. What is the magnitude of the rectangle of the segments of
a chord drawn through a point 3.65 metres distant from the centre
of a circle whose radius is 4.25 metres?

24. The radii of two circles are 4.25 and 1.75 feet respectively,
and the distance between their centres 6.5 feet; find the lengths
of their direct and their transverse common tangents.

25. If a point be  feet outside the circumference of a circle
whose diameter is 7920 miles, prove that the length of the tangent
drawn from it to the circle is  miles.

26. Two parallel chords of a circle are 12 perches and 16 perches
respectively, and their distance asunder is 2 perches; find the
length of the diameter.

27. What is the locus of the centres of all circles touching a given circle in a given point?

28. What is the condition that must be fulfilled that four
points may be concyclic?

29. If the angle in a segment of a circle be a right angle and
a-half, what part of the whole circumference is it?

30. Mention the converse Propositions of Book III. which are
proved directly.

31. What is the locus of the middle points of equal chords in a
circle?

32. The radii of two circles are 6 and 8, and the distance between
their centres 10; find the length of their common chord.

33. If a figure of any even number of sides be inscribed in a
circle, prove that the sum of one set of alternate angles is equal
to the sum of the remaining angles.
footnotesize

Exercises on Book III.


1. If two chords of a circle intersect at right angles, the sum
of the squares on their segments is equal to the square on the
diameter.

2. If a chord of a given circle subtend a right angle at a fixed
point, the rectangle of the perpendiculars on it from the fixed
point and from the centre of the given circle is constant. Also
the sum of the squares of perpendiculars on it from two other
fixed points (which may be found) is constant.

3. If through either of the points of intersection of two equal
circles any line be drawn meeting them again in two points,
these points are equally distant from the other intersection of the
circles.

4. Draw a tangent to a given circle so that the triangle formed
by it and two fixed tangents to the circle shall be-1, a maximum;
2, a minimum.

5. If through the points of intersection ,  of two circles any
two lines ,  be drawn parallel to each other, and meeting
the circles again in , , , ; then .

6. In every triangle the bisector of the greatest angle is the
least of the three bisectors of the angles.

7. The circles whose diameters are the four sides of any cyclic
quadrilateral intersect again in four concyclic points.

8. The four angular points of a cyclic quadrilateral determine
four triangles whose orthocentres (the intersections of their perpendiculars)
form an equal quadrilateral.

9. If through one of the points of intersection of two circles
we draw two common chords, the lines joining the extremities
of these chords make a given angle with each other.

10. The square on the perpendicular from any point in the circumference
of a circle, on the chord of contact of two tangents, is
equal to the rectangle of the perpendiculars from the same point
on the tangents.

11. Find a point in the circumference of a given circle, the
sum of the squares on whose distances from two given points may
be a maximum or a minimum.

12. Four circles are described on the sides of a quadrilateral as
diameters. The common chord of any two on adjacent sides is
parallel to the common chord of the remaining two.

13. The rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from any
point in a circle, on the diagonals of an inscribed quadrilateral, is
equal to the rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from the
same point on either pair of opposite sides.

14. The rectangle contained by the sides of a triangle is
greater than the square on the internal bisector of the vertical
angle, by the rectangle contained by the segments of the base.

15. If through , one of the points of intersection of two
circles, we draw any line , cutting the circles again in
 and , the tangents at  and  intersect at a given angle.

16. If a chord of a given circle pass through a given point, the
locus of the intersection of tangents at its extremities is a right
line.

17. The rectangle contained by the distances of the point where
the internal bisector of the vertical angle meets the base, and the
point where the perpendicular from the vertex meets it from the
middle point of the base, is equal to the square on half the difference
of the sides.

18. State and prove the Proposition analogous to 17 for the
external bisector of the vertical angle.

19. The square on the external diagonal of a cyclic quadrilateral
is equal to the sum of the squares on the tangents from
its extremities to the circumscribed circle.

20. If a variable circle touch a given circle and a given line,
the chord of contact passes through a given point.

21. If , ,  be three points in the circumference of a circle,
and ,  the middle points of the arcs , ; then if the line
 intersect the chords ,  in the points , ,  is equal
to .

22. Given two circles, , ; then if any secant cut  in the
points , , and  in the points , , and another secant cuts
them in the points , ; ,  respectively; the four chords
, , ,  form a cyclic quadrilateral.

23. If a cyclic quadrilateral be such that a circle can be
inscribed in it, the lines joining the points of contact are perpendicular
to each other.

24. If through the point of intersection of the diagonals of a
cyclic quadrilateral the minimum chord be drawn, that point will
bisect the part of the chord between the opposite sides of the
quadrilateral.

25. Given the base of a triangle, the vertical angle, and either
the internal or the external bisector at the vertical angle; construct
it.

26. If through the middle point  of a given arc  we
draw any chord , cutting  in , the rectangle  is
constant.

27. The four circles circumscribing the four triangles formed
by any four lines pass through a common point.

28. If , ,  be any three points on the three sides of a triangle
, the three circles about the triangles , , 
pass through a common point.

29. If the position of the common point in the last question be
given, the three angles of the triangle  are given, and conversely.

30. Place a given triangle so that its three sides shall pass
through three given points.

31. Place a given triangle so that its three vertices shall lie on
three given lines.

32. Construct the greatest triangle equiangular to a given one
whose sides shall pass through three given points.

33. Construct the least triangle equiangular to a given one
whose vertices shall lie on three given lines.

34. Construct the greatest triangle equiangular to a given one
whose sides shall touch three given circles.

35. If two sides of a given triangle pass through fixed points,
the third touches a fixed circle.

36. If two sides of a given triangle touch fixed circles, the
third touches a fixed circle.

37. Construct an equilateral triangle having its vertex at a
given point, and the extremities of its base on a given circle.

38. Construct an equilateral triangle having its vertex at a
given point, and the extremities of its base on two given circles.

39. Place a given triangle so that its three sides shall touch
three given circles.

40. Circumscribe a square about a given quadrilateral.

41. Inscribe a square in a given quadrilateral.

42. Describe circles-(1) orthogonal (cutting at right angles) to
a given circle and passing through two given points; (2) orthogonal
to two others, and passing through a given point; (3) orthogonal
to three others.

43. If from the extremities of a diameter  of a semicircle
two chords ,  be drawn, meeting in , .

44. If  be a cyclic quadrilateral, and if we describe any
circle passing through the points  and , another through 
and , a third through  and , and a fourth through  and ;
these circles intersect successively in four other points , , , ,
forming another cyclic quadrilateral.

45. If  be an equilateral triangle, what is the locus of the
point , if ?

46. In a triangle, given the sum or the difference of two sides
and the angle formed by these sides both in magnitude and position,
the locus of the centre of the circumscribed circle is a right line.

47. Describe a circle-(1) through two given points which
shall bisect the circumference of a given circle; (2) through
one given point which shall bisect the circumference of two
given circles.

48. Find the locus of the centre of a circle which bisects the
circumferences of two given circles.

49. Describe a circle which shall bisect the circumferences of
three given circles.

50.  is a diameter of a circle; ,  are two chords meeting
the tangent at  in the points ,  respectively: prove that
the points , , ,  are concyclic.

51.  is a perpendicular from any point  in a semicircle on
the diameter ;  is a circle touching  in ,  in ,
and the semicircle in ; prove-(1) that the points , ,  are
collinear; (2) that .

52. Being given an obtuse-angled triangle, draw from the
obtuse angle to the opposite side a line whose square shall be
equal to the rectangle contained by the segments into which it
divides the opposite side.

53.  is a point outside a circle whose centre is ; two perpendicular
lines passing through  intercept chords ,  on
the circle; then .

54. The sum of the squares on the sides of a triangle is equal
to twice the sum of the rectangles contained by each perpendicular
and the portion of it comprised between the corresponding vertex
and the orthocentre; also equal to  minus the sum of the
squares of the distances of the orthocentre from the vertices.

55. If two circles touch in , and if  be any point outside the
circles at which their radii through  subtend equal angles, if
,  be tangent from , .




BOOK IVInscription and Circumscription of Triangles and of Regular Polygons in and about Circles

i. If two rectilineal figures be so related that the
angular points of one lie on the sides of the other-1,
the former is said to be inscribed in the latter;
2, the latter is said to be described about the former.

ii. A rectilineal figure is said to be inscribed in a
circle when its angular points are on the circumference.
Reciprocally, a rectilineal figure is said to be circumscribedto a circle when each side touches the circle.

iii. A circle is said to be inscribed in a rectilineal
figure when it touches each side of the figure. Reciprocally,
a circle is said to be circumscribed to a rectilineal
figure when it passes through each angular point
of the figure.

iv. A rectilineal figure which is both equilateral and
equiangular is said to be regular.

Observation.-The following summary of the contents of the
Fourth Book will assist the student in remembering it:-

1. It contains sixteen Propositions, of which four relate to
triangles, four to squares, four to pentagons, and four miscellaneous
Propositions.

2. Of the four Propositions occupied with triangles-

() One is to inscribe a triangle in a circle.

() Its reciprocal, to describe a triangle about a circle.

() To inscribe a circle in a triangle.

() Its reciprocal, to describe a circle about a triangle.

3. If we substitute in (), (), (), () squares for triangles,
and pentagons for triangles, we have the problems for squares
and pentagons respectively.

4. Every Proposition in the fourth Book is a problem.
footnotesize

PROP. I.-Problem.In a given circle  to place a chord equal to a given
line  not greater than the diameter.

1809f151

Sol.-Draw any diameter  of the circle; then, if
 be equal to ,
the thing required is
done; if not, from 
cut off the part 
equal to  [I. iii.];
and with  as centre
and  as radius, describe
the circle ,
cutting the circle 
in the points , . Join . Then  is the chord
required.

Dem.-Because  is the centre of the circle ,
 is equal to  [I. Def. xxxii.]; but  is equal
to  (const.); therefore  is equal to .

PROP. II.-Problem.In a given circle  to inscribe a triangle equiangular
to a given triangle .

1709f152

Sol.-Take any point  in the circumference, and
at it draw the tangent
; then make the
angle  equal to
, and  equal to
 [I. xxiii.] Join .
 is a triangle fulfilling
the required conditions.

Dem.-The angle  is equal to  (const.), and
 is equal to the angle  in the alternate segment
[III. xxxii.]. Hence the angle  is equal to
. In like manner the angle  is equal to .
Therefore [I. xxxii.] the remaining angle  is equal to
. Hence the triangle  inscribed in the given
circle is equiangular to .

PROP. III.-Problem.About a given circle  to describe a triangle equiangular
to a given triangle .

Sol.-Produce any side  of the given triangle
both ways to  and , and from the centre  of the
circle draw any radius ; make the angle 
equal to  [I. xxiii.], and the angle  equal to
. At the points , ,  draw the tangents ,
,  to the given circle.  is a triangle fulfilling
the required conditions.

230f153

Dem.-Because  touches the circle at , the
angle  is right. In like manner, the angle 
is right; but the sum of the four angles of the quadrilateral
 is equal to four right angles. Therefore
the sum of the two remaining angles , 
is two right angles; and [I. xiii.] the sum of the two
angles ,  is two right angles. Therefore the
sum of ,  is equal to the sum of , ;
but  is equal to  (const.). Hence  is
equal to . In like manner,  is equal to
; therefore [I. xxxii.] the remaining angle 
is equal to . Hence the triangle  is equiangular
to .

PROP. IV.-Problem.To inscribe a circle in a given triangle .

Sol.-Bisect any two angles ,  of the given triangle
by the lines , ; then , their point of
intersection, is the centre of the required circle.

12011f154

Dem.-From  let fall the perpendiculars , ,
 on the sides of the triangle. Now, in the triangles ,
 the angle  is equal to
 (const.), and the angle
 equal to , because
each is right, and the side 
common. Hence [I. xxvi.] the
side  is equal to . In
like manner  is equal to ;
therefore the three lines ,
,  are all equal. And the
circle described with  as centre and  as radius will
pass through the points , ; and since the angles
, ,  are right, it will [III. xvi.] touch the three
sides of the triangle ; and therefore the circle 
is inscribed in the triangle .

Exercises.

15519f155


1. If the points ,  be joined, the angle  is bisected.
Hence "the bisectors of the angles of a triangle are concurrent"
(compare I. xxvi., Ex. 7).

2. If the sides , ,  of the triangle  be denoted by
, , , and half their sum by , the distances of the vertices
, ,  of the triangle from the points of contact of the inscribed
circle are respectively , , .


3. If the external angles of the triangle  be bisected as in
the annexed diagram, the three
angular points , , , of
the triangle formed by the three
bisectors will be the centres of
three circles, each touching one
side externally, and the other
two produced. These three
circles are called the escribedcircles of the triangle .

4. The distances of the vertices
, ,  from the points
of contact of the escribed circle
which touches  externally
are , , .

5. The centre of the inscribed
circle, the centre of each
escribed circle, and two of the
angular points of the triangle,
are concyclic. Also any two of the escribed centres are concyclic
with the corresponding two of the angular points of the triangle.

6. Of the four points , , , , any one is the orthocentre
of the triangle formed by the remaining three.

7. The three triangles , ,  are equiangular.

8. The rectangle ; ; .

9. Since the whole triangle  is made up of the three triangles
, , , we see that the rectangle contained by
the sum of the three sides, and the radius of the inscribed circle,
is equal to twice the area of the triangle. Hence, if  denote the
radius of the inscribed circle,  area of the triangle.

10. If  denote the radius of the escribed circle which touches
the side  externally, it may be shown in like manner that
 area of the triangle.

11. .

12. Square of area .

13. Square of area .

14. If the triangle  be right-angled, having the angle 
right,




15. Given the base of a triangle, the vertical angle, and the
radius of the inscribed, or any of the escribed circles: construct
it.
footnotesize

PROP. V.-Problem.To describe a circle about a given triangle .

10810f156

Sol.-Bisect any two sides ,  in the points , .
Erect ,  at right angles to ,
; then , the point of intersection
of the perpendiculars, is the centre
of the required circle.

Dem.-Join , , . The
triangles ,  have the side
 equal  (const.), and  common,
and the angle  equal to
the angle , because each is
right. Hence [I. iv.]  is equal to . In like
manner  is equal to . Therefore the three lines
, ,  are equal, and the circle described with
 as centre, and  as radius, will pass through the
points , , , and be described about the triangle .

Cor. 1.-Since the perpendicular from  on  bisects
it [III. iii.], we see that the perpendiculars at the
middle points of the sides of a triangle are concurrent.

Def.-The circle  is called the circumcircle, its
radius the circumradius, and its centre the circumcentreof the triangle.

Exercises.


1. The three perpendiculars of a triangle  are concurrent.

10310f157

Dem.-Describe a circle about the triangle. Let fall the perpendicular
. Produce  to meet the
circle in . Make . Join ,
. Produce  to meet  in .
Then the triangles ,  have the
sides ,  in one equal to the sides
,  in the other, and the contained
angles equal. Hence [I. iv.] the angle
 equal ; but 
[III. xxi.]; hence , and ; hence ; but 
is right, hence  is right. In like
manner, if  be joined to meet  in ,  will be perpendicular
to . Hence the three perpendiculars pass through ,
and are concurrent. This Proposition may be proved simply as
follows:-

15013f158

Draw parallels to the sides of the original triangle  through
its vertices, forming a new triangle
 described about
; then the three perpendiculars
at the middle points of the
sides of  are concurrent [v. Cor. 1],
and these are evidently
the perpendiculars from the vertices
on the opposite sides of the
triangle  (compare Ex. 16,
Book I.).

Def.-The point  is called the
orthocentre of the triangle .

2. The three rectangles , ,  are equal.

Def.-The circle round  as centre, the square of whose radius
is equal , is called the polar circleof the triangle .

Observation.-If the orthocentre of the triangle  be
within the triangle, the rectangles , ,  are
negative, because the lines , c., are measured in opposite
directions, and have contrary signs; hence the polar circle is
imaginary; but it is real when the point  is without the triangle-that
is, when the triangle has an obtuse angle.

3. If the perpendiculars of a triangle be produced to meet the
circumscribed circle, the intercepts between the orthocentre and
the circle are bisected by the sides of the triangle.

14516f159

4. The point of bisection  of the line  joining the orthocentre
 to the circumference 
of any triangle is equally distant
from the feet of the perpendiculars,
from the middle points of
the sides, and from the middle
points of the distances of the vertices
from the orthocentre.

Dem.-Draw the perpendicular
; then, since ,  are
perpendiculars on , and  is
bisected in , it is easy to see that
. Again, since , 
are bisected in , ; -that
is,  the radius. Hence
the distance of  from the foot of each perpendicular, and from
the middle point of each side, is  the radius. In like manner,
if  be bisected in , then  the radius. Hence we have
the following theorem:-The nine points made up of the feet of the
perpendiculars, the middle points of the sides, and the middle points
of the lines from the vertices to the orthocentre, are concyclic.

Def.-The circle through these nine points is called the "nine
points circle" of the triangle.

5. The circumcircle of a triangle is the "nine points circle"
of each of the four triangles formed by joining the centres of the
inscribed and escribed circles.

6. The distances between the vertices of a triangle and its
orthocentre are respectively the doubles of the perpendiculars
from the circumcentre on the sides.

7. The radius of the "nine points circle" of a triangle is equal
to half its circumradius.
footnotesize

PROP. VI.-Problem.In a given circle  to inscribe a square.

12010f160

Sol.-Draw any two diameters ,  at right
angles to each other. Join ,
, , .  is a square.

Dem.-Let  be the centre.
Then the four angles at , being
right angles, are equal. Hence
the arcs on which they stand are
equal [III. xxvi.], and hence the
four chords are equal [III. xxix.].
Therefore the figure  is
equilateral.

Again, because  is a diameter, the angle 
is right [III. xxxi.]. In like manner the remaining
angles are right. Hence  is a square.

PROP. VII.-Problem.About a given circle  to describe a square.

Sol.-Through the centre  draw any two diameters
at right angles to each other, and draw at the points
, , ,  the lines , , ,  touching the
circle.  is a square.

12010f161

Dem.-Because  touches the circle at , the angle
 is right [III. xviii.], and
therefore equal to , which
is right (const.). Hence  is
parallel to . In like manner
 is parallel to ; and since
 is equal to , the figure
 is a lozenge, and the angle
 is right; hence  is a
square. In like manner each of
the figures , ,  is a
square. Hence the whole figure is a square.

Cor.-The circumscribed square is double of the inscribed
square.

PROP. VIII.-Problem.In a given square  to inscribe a circle.

Sol.-Bisect (see last diagram) two adjacent sides
,  in the points , , and through ,  draw
the lines , , respectively parallel to , ;
then , the point of intersection of these parallels, is the
centre of the required circle.

Dem.-Because  is a parallelogram, its opposite
sides are equal; therefore  is equal to ; but
 is half the side of the given square; therefore 
is equal to half the side of the given square; and so in
like manner is each of the lines , , ; therefore
the four lines , , ,  are all equal; and since
they are perpendicular to the sides of the given square,
the circle described with  as centre, and  as radius,
will be inscribed in the square.

PROP. IX.-Problem.About a given square  to describe a circle.

Sol.-Draw the diagonals ,  intersecting in 
(see diagram to Proposition vi.).  is the centre of the
required circle.

Dem.-Since  is an isosceles triangle, and the
angle  is right, each of the other angles is half a right
angle; therefore  is half a right angle. In like
manner  is half a right angle; hence the angle
 equal ; therefore [I. vi.]  is equal to .
In like manner  is equal to , and  to .
Hence the circle described, with  as centre and  as
radius, will pass through the points , , , and be
described about the square.

PROP. X.-Problem.To construct an isosceles triangle having each base angle
double the vertical angle.

13011f162

Sol.-Take any line . Divide it in , so that the
rectangle  shall be equal
to  [II. xi.]. With  as centre,
and  as radius, describe
the circle , and in it place
the chord  equal to  [i.].
Join .  is a triangle fulfilling
the required conditions.

Dem.-Join . About the
triangle  describe the circle
 [v.]. Then, because the
rectangle  is equal to
 (const.), and that  is equal to  (const.);
therefore the rectangle  is equal to . Hence
[III. xxxii.]  touches the circle . Hence the
angle  is equal to the angle  in the alternate segment
[III. xxxii.]. To each add , and we have the
angle  equal to the sum of the angles  and ;
but the exterior angle  of the triangle  is
equal to the sum of the angles  and . Hence the
angle  is equal to ; but since  is equal to
, the angle  is equal to ; therefore the
angle  is equal to . Hence [I. vi.]  is
equal to ; but  is equal to  (const.); therefore
 is equal to , and therefore [I. v.] the angle
 is equal to ; but  has been proved to be
equal to the sum of  and . Hence  is double
of . Hence each of the base angles of the triangle 
is double of the vertical angle.

Exercises.


1. Prove that  is an isosceles triangle whose vertical angle
is equal to three times each of the base angles.

2. Prove that  is the side of a regular decagon inscribed in
the circle .

3. If , ,  be consecutive sides of a regular decagon
inscribed in a circle, prove  radius of circle.

4. If  be the second point of intersection of the circle 
with ,  is equal to ; and if , , ,  be
joined, each of the triangles ,  is congruent with .

5.  is the side of a regular pentagon inscribed in the circle
, and  the side of a regular pentagon inscribed in the
circle .

6. Since  is an isosceles triangle, -that
is = ; therefore -that is, the square
of the side of a pentagon inscribed in a circle exceeds the square of
the side of the decagon inscribed in the same circle by the square of
the radius.
footnotesize

PROP. XI.-Problem.To inscribe a regular pentagon in a given circle .

13011f163

Sol.-Construct an isosceles triangle [x.], having
each base angle double the vertical
angle, and inscribe in the
given circle a triangle 
equiangular to it. Bisect the
angles ,  by the lines
, . Join , , ,
; then the figure  is
a regular pentagon.

Dem.-Because each of the
base angles ,  is
double of the angle , and the lines ,  bisect
them, the five angles , , , ,  are
all equal; therefore the arcs on which they stand are
equal; and therefore the five chords, , , , ,
 are equal. Hence the figure  is equilateral.

Again, because the arcs ,  are equal, adding
the arc  to both, the arc  is equal to the arc
, and therefore [III. xxvii.] the angles ,
, which stand on them, are equal. In the same
manner it can be proved that all the angles are equal;
therefore the figure  is equiangular. Hence it
is a regular pentagon.

Exercises.


1. The figure formed by the five diagonals of a regular pentagon
is another regular pentagon.

2. If the alternate sides of a regular pentagon be produced to
meet, the five points of meeting form another regular pentagon.

3. Every two consecutive diagonals of a regular pentagon
divide each other in extreme and mean ratio.

4. Being given a side of a regular pentagon, construct it.

5. Divide a right angle into five equal parts.
footnotesize

PROP. XII.-Problem.To describe a regular pentagon about a given circle .

Sol.-Let the five points , , , ,  on the circle
be the vertices of any inscribed regular pentagon: at
these points draw tangents , , , , : the
figure  is a circumscribed regular pentagon.

14012f164

Dem.-Let  be the centre of the circle. Join ,
, . Now, because the
angles ,  of the quadrilateral
 are right angles
[III. xviii.], the sum of the
two remaining angles ,
 is two right angles. In
like manner the sum of the
angles ,  is two
right angles; therefore the
sum of ,  is equal
to the sum of , ;
but the angles ,  are equal, because they
stand on equal arcs ,  [III. xxvii.]. Hence the
angle  is equal to . In like manner the
remaining angles of the figure  are equal.
Therefore it is equiangular.

Again, join , . Now the triangles , 
have the sides ,  equal [III. xvii., Ex. 1], and 
common, and the base  equal to the base . Hence
the angle  is equal to  [I. viii.]. Therefore
the angle  is half the angle . In like manner
 is half the angle ; but  has been
proved equal to ; hence  is equal to ,
and  is equal to , each being right, and 
common to the two triangles , ; hence
[I. xxvi.] the side  is equal to ; therefore  is
double . In like manner  is double ; but 
is equal to ; hence  is equal to . In like
manner the remaining sides are equal; therefore the
figure  is equilateral, and it has been proved
equiangular. Hence it is a regular pentagon.

This Proposition is a particular case of the following general
theorem, of which the proof is the same as the foregoing:-

"If tangents be drawn to a circle, at the angular points of an
inscribed polygon of any number of sides, they will form a regular
polygon of the same number of sides circumscribed to the circle."
footnotesize

PROP. XIII.-Problem.To inscribe a circle in a regular pentagon .

Sol.-Bisect two adjacent angles ,  by the lines
, ; then , the point of intersection of the bisectors,
is the centre of the required circle.

Dem.-Join , and let fall perpendiculars from 
on the five sides of the pentagon.
Now the triangles
,  have the side 
equal to  (hyp.), and 
common, and the angle 
equal to  (const.). Hence
the angle  is equal to
 [I. iv.]; but  is half
 (const.). Therefore 
is half , and therefore 
bisects the angle . In
like manner it may be proved that  bisects the
angle , and  the angle .


13311f165

Again, the triangles ,  have the angle 
equal to , each being right; and  equal to ,
because  bisects the angle  (const.), and 
common; hence [I. xxvi.]  is equal to . In like
manner all the perpendiculars from  on the sides of
the pentagon are equal; hence the circle whose centre
is , and radius , will touch all the sides of the
pentagon, and will therefore be inscribed in it.

In the same manner a circle may be inscribed in
any regular polygon.

PROP. XIV.-Problem.To describe a circle about a regular pentagon .

Sol.-Bisect two adjacent angles ,  by the lines
, . Then , the point of intersection of the bisectors,
is the centre of the required circle.

11010f166

Dem.-Join , , . Then the triangles ,
 have the side  equal to
 (hyp.),  common, and the
angle  equal to  (const.).
Hence the angle  is equal to
 [I. iv.]; but the angle 
is equal to  (hyp.); and since
 is half  (const.), 
is half . Hence  bisects
the angle . In like manner
it may be proved that  bisects
, and  the angle . Again, because the
angle  is equal to , their halves are equal.
Hence  is equal to ; therefore [I. vi.]  is
equal to . In like manner the lines , , 
are equal to one another and to . Therefore the
circle described with  as centre, and  as radius,
will pass through the points , , , , and be described
about the pentagon.

In the same manner a circle may be described about
any regular polygon.


Propositions xiii., xiv. are particular cases of the following
theorem:-

"A regular polygon of any number of sides has one circle inscribed
in it, and another described about it, and both circles are
concentric."

PROP. XV.-Problem.In a given circle  to inscribe a regular hexagon.

Sol.-Take any point  in the circumference, and
join it to , the centre
of the given circle; then
with  as centre, and 
as radius, describe the
circle , intersecting
the given circle in the
points , . Join ,
, and produce , ,
 to meet the given
circle again in the points , , . Join , , ,
, , ;  is the required hexagon.

1568f167

Dem.-Each of the triangles ,  is equilateral
(see Dem., I. i.). Hence the angles , 
are each one-third of two right angles; therefore 
is one-third of two right angles. Again, the angles
, ,  are [I. xv.] respectively equal to the
angles , , . Therefore the six angles at
the centre are equal, because each is one-third of two
right angles. Therefore the six chords are equal [III. xxix.].
Hence the hexagon is equilateral.

Again, since the arc  is equal to , to each add
the arc ; then the whole arc  is equal to
; therefore the angles ,  which stand
on these arcs are equal [III. xxvii.]. In the same
manner it may be shown that the other angles of the
hexagon are equal. Hence it is equiangular, and is
therefore a regular hexagon inscribed in the circle.


Cor. 1.-The side of a regular hexagon inscribed in
a circle is equal to the radius.

Cor. 2.-If three alternate angles of a hexagon be
joined, they form an inscribed equilateral triangle.

Exercises.


1. The area of a regular hexagon inscribed in a circle is equal to
twice the area of an equilateral triangle inscribed in the circle;
and the square of the side of the triangle is three times the square
of the side of the hexagon.

2. If the diameter of a circle be produced to  until the produced
part is equal to the radius, the two tangents from  and
their chord of contact form an equilateral triangle.

3. The area of a regular hexagon inscribed in a circle is half
the area of an equilateral triangle, and three-fourths of the area
of a regular hexagon circumscribed to the circle.
footnotesize

PROP. XVI.-Problem.To inscribe a regular polygon of fifteen sides in a given circle.

Sol.-Inscribe a regular pentagon  in the
circle [xi.], and also an equilateral triangle  [ii.].
Join .  is a side of the required polygon.

1109f168

Dem.-Since  is a regular pentagon, the arc
 is ths of the circumference;
and since  is an equilateral
triangle, the arc  is rd of
the circumference. Hence the arc
, which is the difference between
these two arcs, is equal to
rd, or th of the entire
circumference; and therefore, if
chords equal to  [i.] be placed
round the circle, we shall have a
regular polygon of fifteen sides, or quindecagon, inscribed
in it.


Scholium.-Until the year 1801 no regular polygon could be
described by constructions employing the line and circle only,
except those discussed in this Book, and those obtained from
them by the continued bisection of the arcs of which their sides
are the chords; but in that year the celebrated Gauss proved that
if  be a prime number, regular polygons of  sides are
inscriptable by elementary geometry. For the case , which
is the only figure of this class except the pentagon for which
a construction has been given, see Note at the end of this work.
footnotesize

Questions for Examination on Book IV.


1. What is the subject-matter of Book IV.?

2. When is one rectilineal figure said to be inscribed in
another?

3. When circumscribed?

4. When is a circle said to be inscribed in a rectilineal figure?

5. When circumscribed about it?

6. What is meant by reciprocal propositions? Ans. In reciprocal
propositions, to every line in one there corresponds a point
in the other; and, conversely, to every point in one there corresponds
a line in the other.

7. Give instances of reciprocal propositions in Book IV.

8. What is a regular polygon?

9. What figures can be inscribed in, and circumscribed about,
a circle by means of Book IV.?

10. What regular polygons has Gauss proved to be inscriptable
by the line and circle?

11. What is meant by escribed circles?

12. How many circles can be described to touch three lines
forming a triangle?

13. What is the centroid of a triangle?

14. What is the orthocentre?

15. What is the circumcentre?

16. What is the polar circle?

17. When is the polar circle imaginary?

18. What is the "nine-points circle"?

19. Why is it so called?

20. Name the special nine points through which it passes.

21. What three regular figures can be used in filling up the
space round a point? Ans. Equilateral triangles, squares, and
hexagons.

22. If the sides of a triangle be 13, 14, 15, what are the values
of the radii of its inscribed and escribed circles?

23. What is the radius of the circumscribed circle?

24. What is the radius of its nine-points circle?

25. What is the distance between the centres of its inscribed
and circumscribed circles?

26. If  be the radius of a circle, what is the area of its
inscribed equilateral triangle?-of its inscribed square?-its
inscribed pentagon?-its inscribed hexagon?-its inscribed octagon?-its
inscribed decagon?

27. With the same hypothesis, find the sides of the same regular
figures.
footnotesize

Exercises on Book IV.


1. If a circumscribed polygon be regular, the corresponding
inscribed polygon is also regular, and conversely.

2. If a circumscribed triangle be isosceles, the corresponding
inscribed triangle is isosceles, and conversely.

3. If the two isosceles triangles in Ex. 2 have equal vertical
angles, they are both equilateral.

4. Divide an angle of an equilateral triangle into five equal
parts.

5. Inscribe a circle in a sector of a given circle.

6. The line  is parallel to the base  of the triangle :
prove that the circles described about the triangles , 
touch at .

7. The diagonals of a cyclic quadrilateral intersect in : prove
that the tangent at  to the circle about the triangle  is
parallel to .

8. Inscribe a regular octagon in a given square.

9. A line of given length slides between two given lines: find
the locus of the intersection of perpendiculars from its extremities
to the given lines.

10. If the perpendicular to any side of a triangle at its middle
point meet the internal and external bisectors of the opposite
angle in the points  and ; prove that ,  are points on the
circumscribed circle.

11. Through a given point  draw a chord of a circle so that
the intercept  may subtend a given angle .

12. In a given circle inscribe a triangle having two sides passing
through two given points, and the third parallel to a given
line.

13. Given four points, no three of which are collinear; describe
a circle which shall be equidistant from them.

14. In a given circle inscribe a triangle whose three sides shall
pass through three given points.

15. Construct a triangle, being given-
0.3in0in

[1.] The radius of the inscribed circle, the vertical angle,
and the perpendicular from the vertical angle on the
base.

[2.] The base, the sum or difference of the other sides, and
the radius of the inscribed circle, or of one of the
escribed circles.

[3.] The centres of the escribed circles.

16. If  be the middle point of the base of a triangle,  the
diameter of the circumscribed circle which passes through , and
 the point where a parallel to the base through the vertex meets
: prove  is equal to the square of half the sum, and
 equal to the square of half the difference of the two remaining
sides.

17. If from any point within a regular polygon of  sides perpendiculars
be let fall on the sides, their sum is equal to  times
the radius of the inscribed circle.

18. The sum of the perpendiculars let fall from the angular
points of a regular polygon of  sides on any line is equal to
 times the perpendicular from the centre of the polygon on the
same line.

19. If  denotes the radius of the circle circumscribed about a
triangle , , , ,  the radii of its inscribed and escribed
circles, , ,  the perpendiculars from its circumcentre on the
sides; , ,  the segments of these perpendiculars between the
sides and circumference of the circumscribed circle, we have the
relations-
3
 r' &+ &r" &+ &r"' &= 4R + r,  

 &+ &&+ &&= 2R - r,  

 &+ &&+ &&= 0R + r.
The relation (3) supposes that the circumcentre is inside the
triangle.

20. Through a point , taken on the side  of a triangle
, is drawn a transversal , and circles described about
the triangles , . The locus of their second point of
intersection is a circle.

21. In every quadrilateral circumscribed about a circle, the
middle points of its diagonals and the centre of the circle are
collinear.

22. Find on a given line a point , the sum or difference of
whose distances from two given points may be given.

23. Find a point such that, if perpendiculars be let fall from it
on four given lines, their feet may be collinear.

24. The line joining the orthocentre of a triangle to any point
, in the circumference of its circumscribed circle, is bisected by
the line of collinearity of perpendiculars from  on the sides of
the triangle.

25. The orthocentres of the four triangles formed by any four
lines are collinear.

26. If a semicircle and its diameter be touched by any circle,
either internally or externally, twice the rectangle contained by
the radius of the semicircle, and the radius of the tangential circle,
is equal to the rectangle contained by the segments of any secant
to the semicircle, through the point of contact of the diameter and
touching circle.

27. If ,  be the radii of two circles, touching each other at
the centre of the inscribed circle of a triangle, and each touching
the circumscribed circle, prove



and state and prove corresponding theorems for the escribed
circles.

28. If from any point in the circumference of the circle, circumscribed
about a regular polygon of  sides, lines be drawn to
its angular points, the sum of their squares is equal to  times
the square of the radius.

29. In the same case, if the lines be drawn from any point in
the circumference of the inscribed circle, prove that the sum of
their squares is equal to  times the sum of the squares of the
radii of the inscribed and the circumscribed circles.

30. State the corresponding theorem for the sum of the squares
of the lines drawn from any point in the circumference of any
concentric circle.

31. If from any point in the circumference of any concentric
circle perpendiculars be let fall on all the sides of any regular
polygon, the sum of their squares is constant.

32. For the inscribed circle, the constant is equal to  times
the square of the radius.

33. For the circumscribed circle, the constant is equal to 
times the square of the radius of the inscribed circle, together with
 times the square of the radius of the circumscribed circle.

34. If the circumference of a circle whose radius is  be divided
into seventeen equal parts, and  be the diameter drawn from
one of the points of division , and if ,  denote
the chords from  to the points of division, , 
on one side of , then





Dem.-Let the supplemental chords corresponding to , ,
c., be denoted by , , c.; then [III. xxxv. Ex. 2], we
have
*
&&  _1 r_1 &= R r_2,  &&Hence 

&&  _2 r_2 &= R r_4,  &&

&&  _4 r_4 &= R r_8,  &&

&&  _8 r_8 &= R r_1,  &&

&Hence &
  _1 _2 _4 _8 &= R^4.  &&
And it may be proved in the same manner that
*
&&  _1 _2 _3 _4 _5 _6 _7 _8 &= R^8. &&Therefore 

&Therefore &
  _3 _5 _6 _7 &= R^4.  &&

35. If from the middle point of the line joining any two of
four concyclic points a perpendicular be let fall on the line joining
the remaining two, the six perpendiculars thus obtained are
concurrent.

36. The greater the number of sides of a regular polygon circumscribed
about a given circle, the less will be its perimeter.

37. The area of any regular polygon of more than four sides
circumscribed about a circle is less than the square of the diameter.

38. Four concyclic points taken three by three determine four
triangles, the centres of whose nine-points circles are concyclic.

39. If two sides of a triangle be given in position, and if their
included angle be equal to an angle of an equilateral triangle, the
locus of the centre of its nine-points circle is a right line.

40. If, in the hypothesis and notation of Ex. 34, ,  denote
any two suffixes whose sum is less than 8, and of which  is the
greater,




For instance,  [III. xxxv., Ex. 7].

In the same case, if the suffixes be greater than 8,




For instance,  [III. xxxv., Ex. 6].

41. Two lines are given in position: draw a transversal through
a given point, forming with the given lines a triangle of given
perimeter.

42. Given the vertical angle and perimeter of a triangle, construct
it with either of the following data: 1. The bisector of
the vertical angle; 2. the perpendicular from the vertical angle
on the base; 3. the radius of the inscribed circle.

43. In a given circle inscribe a triangle so that two sides may
pass through two given points, and that the third side may be a
maximum or a minimum.

44. If  be the semiperimeter of a triangle, , , , the
radii of its escribed circles,




45. The feet of the perpendiculars from the extremities of the
base on either bisector of the vertical angle, the middle point of
the base, and the foot of the perpendicular from the vertical
angle on the base, are concyclic.

46. Given the base of a triangle and the vertical angle; find
the locus of the centre of the circle passing through the centres
of the escribed circles.

47. The perpendiculars from the centres of the escribed circles
of a triangle on the corresponding sides are concurrent.

48. If  be the diameter of a circle, and  any chord cutting
 in , and if the lines ,  intersect the perpendicular
to  at , in  and  respectively, the points , , ,  are
concyclic.

49. If the sides of a triangle be in arithmetical progression,
and if ,  be the radii of the circumscribed and inscribed circles;
then  is equal to the rectangle contained by the greatest and
least sides.

50. Inscribe in a given circle a triangle having its three sides
parallel to three given lines.

51. If the sides , , c., of a regular pentagon be bisected
in the points , , , , , and if the two pairs of alternate
sides, , ; , , meet in the points , , respectively,
prove




52. In a circle, prove that an equilateral inscribed polygon is
regular, and also an equilateral circumscribed polygon, if the
number of sides be odd.

53. Prove also that an equiangular circumscribed polygon is
regular, and an equiangular inscribed polygon, if the number of
sides be odd.

54. The sum of the perpendiculars drawn to the sides of an
equiangular polygon from any point inside the figure is constant.

55. Express the sides of a triangle in terms of the radii of its
escribed circles.
footnotesize



BOOK VTheory of Proportion

Introduction.-Every proposition in the theories of
ratio and proportion is true for all descriptions of magnitude.
Hence it follows that the proper treatment is
the Algebraic. It is, at all events, the easiest and the
most satisfactory. Euclid's proofs of the propositions,
in the Theory of Proportion, possess at present none
but a historical interest, as no student reads them now.
But although his demonstrations are abandoned, his
propositions are quoted by every writer, and his nomenclature
is universally adopted. For these reasons
it appears to us that the best method is to state Euclid's
definitions, explain them, or prove them when necessary,
for some are theorems under the guise of definitions,
and then supply simple algebraic proofs of his
propositions.

i. A less magnitude is said to be a part or submultipleof a greater magnitude, when the less measures
the greater-that is, when the less is contained a certain
number of times exactly in the greater.

ii. A greater magnitude is said to be a multiple of a
less when the greater is measured by the less-that is,
when the greater contains the less a certain number of
times exactly.


iii. Ratio is the mutual relation of two magnitudes
of the same kind with respect to quantity.

iv. Magnitudes are said to have a ratio to one
another when the less can be multiplied so as to
exceed the greater.

These definitions require explanation, especially
Def. iii., which has the fault of conveying no precise
meaning-being, in fact, unintelligible.

The following annotations will make them explicit:-
1532f256


1. If an integer be divided into any number of equal parts,
one, or the sum of any number of these parts, is called a fraction.
Thus, if the line  represent
the integer, and if it be divided
into four equal parts in the
points , , , then  is ;
, ; , . Thus, a fraction is denoted by two numbers
parted by a horizontal line; the lower, called the denominator,
denotes the number of equal parts into which the integer is divided;
and the upper, called the numerator, denotes the number
of these equal parts which are taken. Hence it follows, that if
the numerator be less than the denominator, the fraction is less
than unity. If the numerator be equal to the denominator, the
fraction is equal to unity; and if greater than the denominator, it
is greater than unity. It is evident that a fraction is an abstract
quantity-that is, that its value is independent of the nature of
the integer which is divided.

2. If we divide each of the equal parts , , ,  into
two equal parts, the whole, , will be divided into eight equal
parts; and we see that ; ; ; ;
Now, we saw in 1, that  of the integer, and we have just
shown that it is equal to . Hence ; but  would be got
from  by multiplying its terms (numerator and denominator)
by . Hence we infer generally that multiplying the terms of
any fraction by  does not alter its value. In like manner it
may be shown that multiplying the terms of a fraction by any
whole number does not alter its value. Hence it follows conversely,
that dividing the terms of a fraction by a whole number
does not alter the value. Hence we have the following important
and fundamental theorem:-Two transformations can be made on
any fraction without changing its value; namely, its terms can be
either multiplied or divided by any whole number, and in either
case the value of the new fraction is equal to the value of the
original one.


3. If we take any number, such as , and multiply it by any
whole number, the product is called a multiple of . Thus , ,
, , c., are multiples of ; but , , , c., are not, because
the multiplication of  by any whole number will not produce
them. Conversely,  is a submultiple, or measure, or part
of , , , , c., because it is contained in each of these without
a remainder; but not of , , , c., because in each case
it leaves a remainder.

1506f257

4. If we consider two magnitudes of the same kind, such as
two lines , , and if we suppose that  is equal to  of
, it is evident, if  be divided into  equal parts, and  into
 equal parts, that one of the
parts into which  is divided
is equal to one of the parts into
which  is divided. And as
there are  parts in , and 
in , we express this relation
by saying that  has to
 the ratio of  to ; and we denote it thus, . Hence the
ratio  expresses the same idea as the fraction . In fact,
both are different ways of expressing and writing the same thing.
When written  it is called a ratio, and when  a fraction.
In the same manner it can be shown that every ratio whose terms
are commensurable can be converted into a fraction; and, conversely,
every fraction can be turned into a ratio.
From this explanation we see that the ratio of any two commensurable
magnitudes is the same as the ratio of the numerical
quantities which denote these magnitudes. Thus, the ratio of
two commensurable lines is the ratio of the numbers which express
their lengths, measured with the same unit. And this may
be extended to the case where the lines are incommensurable.
Thus, if  be the side and  the diagonal of a square, the ratio
of  is




When two quantities are incommensurable, such as the diagonal
and the side of a square, although their ratio is not equal to
that of any two commensurable numbers, yet a series of pairs of
fractions can be found whose difference is continually diminishing,
and which ultimately becomes indefinitely small; such that
the ratio of the incommensurable quantities is greater than one,
and less than the other fraction of each pair. These fractions
are called convergents. By their means we can approximate as
nearly as we please to the exact value of the ratio. In the case
of the diagonal and the side of a square, the following are the
pairs of convergents:-





and the ratio is intermediate to each pair. It is evident we may
continue the series as far as we please. Now if we denote the
first of any of the foregoing pairs of fractions by , the second
will be ; and in general, in the case of two incommensurable
quantities, two fractions  and  can always be
found, where  can be made as large as we please, one of which
is less and the other greater than the true value of the ratio.
For let  and  be the incommensurable quantities; then, evidently,
we cannot find two multiples , , such that .
In this case, take any multiple of , such as , then this quantity
must lie between some two consecutive multiples of , such as ,
and ; therefore  is greater than unity, and 
less than unity. Hence  lies between  and . Now,
since the difference between  and  namely,  becomes
small as  increases, we see that the difference between the ratio
of two incommensurable quantities and that of two commensurable
numbers  and  can be made as small as we please.
Hence, ultimately, the ratio of incommensurable quantities may
be regarded as the limit of the ratio of commensurable quantities.

5. The two terms of a ratio are called the antecedent and the
consequent. These correspond to the numerator and the denominator
of a fraction. Hence we have the following definition:-"A
ratio is the fraction got by making the antecedent the numerator
and the consequent the denominator."

6. The reciprocal of a ratio is the ratio obtained by interchanging
the antecedent and the consequent. Thus,  is the reciprocal
of the ratio . Hence we have the following theorem:-"The
product of a ratio and its reciprocal is unity."

7. If we multiply any two numbers, as  and , by any number
such as , the products ,  are called equimultiples of  and .
In like manner,  and  are equimultiples of  and , and 
and  of  and , c.
footnotesize

v. The first of four magnitudes has to the second
the same ratio which the third has to the fourth, when
any equimultiples whatsoever of the first and third
being taken, and any equimultiples whatsoever of the
second and fourth, if, according as the multiple of the
first is greater than, equal to, or less than the multiple
of the second, the multiple of the third is greater than,
equal to, or less than the multiple of the fourth.

vi. Magnitudes which have the same ratio are called
proportionals. When four magnitudes are proportionals,
it is usually expressed by saying, "The first is to
the second as the third is to the fourth."

viii. Analogy or proportion is the similitude of
ratios.

We have given the foregoing definitions in the order of Euclid,
as given by Simson, Lardner, and others;(Except that viii. is put before vii., because it relates, as v. and
vi., to the equality of ratios, whereas vii. is a test of their
inequality.) but it is evidently an
inverted order; for vi. viii. are definitions of proportion, and v. is
only a test of proportion, and is not a definition but a theorem,
and one which, instead of being taken for granted, requires
proof. The following explanations will give the student clear
conceptions of their meaning:-

1. If we take two ratios, such as  and , which are
each equal to the same thing (in this example each is equal to ),
they are equal to one another (I. Axiom i.). Then we may
write it thus-



This would be the most intelligible way, but it is not the usual
one, which is as follows:-. In this form it is
called a proportion. Hence a proportion consists of two ratios
which are asserted by it to be equal. Its four terms consist of
two antecedents and two consequents. The 1st and 3rd terms
are the antecedents, and the 2nd and 4th the consequents. Also
the first and last terms are called the extremes, and the two
middle terms the means.

2. Since a proportion consists of two equal ratios, and each
ratio can be written as a fraction, whenever we have a proportion
such as



we can write it in the form of two equal fractions. Thus:



Conversely, an equation between two fractions can be put into a
proportion. By means of these simple principles all the various
properties of proportion can be proved in the most direct and easy
manner.

3. If we take the proportion , and multiply the
first and third terms, each by , and second and fourth, each by
, we get the four multiples, , , , ; and we want to
prove that if  is greater than ,  is greater than ; if
equal, equal; and if less, less.
*
&Dem.-Since &
  a : b &:: c : d,
&Dem.-Since &

&we have &
  ab &= cd.  &&

Hence, multiplying each by  we get
&&  manb &= mcnd.  &&
Now, it is evident that if  is greater than unity,  is greater
than unity; but if  is greater than unity,  is greater than
; and if  is greater than unity,  is greater than . In
like manner, if  be equal to ,  is equal to ; and if less,
less.

The foregoing is an easy proof of the converse of the theorem
which is contained in Euclid's celebrated Fifth Definition.

Next, to prove Euclid's theorem-that if, according as the
multiple of the first of four magnitudes is greater than, equal to,
or less than the multiple of the second, the multiple of the third
is greater than, equal to, or less than the multiple of the fourth;
the ratio of the first to the second is equal to the ratio of the
third to the fourth.

Dem.-Let, , , ,  be the four magnitudes. First suppose
that  and  are commensurable, then it is evident that we can
take multiples , , such that . Hence, by hypothesis,
. Thus,



*
&therefore &&
  ab = cd.
&therefore &
Next, suppose  and  are incommensurable. Then, as in a recent
note, we can find two numbers  and , such that  is greater
than unity, but  less than unity. Hence  lies between 
and . Now, since by hypothesis, when  is greater than
unity,  is greater than unity; and when  is less than
unity,  is less than unity. Hence, since  lies between
 and ,  lies between the same quantities. Therefore
the difference between  and  is less than ; and since  may
be as large as we please, the difference is nothing;
therefore



footnotesize

vii. When of the multiples of four magnitudes
(taken as in Def. v.) the multiple of the first is greater
than that of the second, but the multiple of the third
not greater than that of the fourth, the first has to
the second a greater ratio than the third has to the
fourth.

This, instead of being a definition, is a theorem. We have
altered the last clause from that given in Simson's Euclid, which
runs thus:-"The first is said to have to the second a greater
ratio than the third has to the fourth." This is misleading, as it
implies that it is, by convention, that the first ratio is greater
than the second, whereas, in fact, such is not the case; for it
follows from the hypothesis that the first ratio is greater than
the second; and if it did not, it could not be made so by definition.
We have made a similar change in the enunciation of the
Fifth Definition.

Let , , ,  be the four magnitudes, and  and  the multiples
taken, it is required to prove, that if  be greater than ,
but  not greater than , that the ratio  is greater than the
ratio .

Dem.-Since  is greater than , but  not greater than
, it is evident that
*
&& manb& is greater than mcnd; &&

&therefore &
   ab& is greater than cd; &therefore &
that is, the ratio  is greater than the ratio .
footnotesize

ix. Proportion consists of three terms at least.


This has the same fault as some of the others-it is not a
definition, but an inference. It occurs when the means in a
proportion are equal, so that, in fact, there are four terms. As
an illustration, let us take the numbers , , . Here the ratio of
 is , and the ratio of  is , so that , ,  are continued
proportionals; but, in reality, there are four terms, for the full
proportion is .
footnotesize

x. When three magnitudes are continual proportionals,
the first is said to have to the third the
duplicate ratio of that which it has to the second.

xi. When four magnitudes are continual proportionals,
the first is said to have to the fourth the
triplicate ratio of that which it has to the second.

xii. When there is any number of magnitudes of the
same kind greater than two, the first is said to have to
the last the ratio compounded of the ratios of the first
to the second, of the second to the third, of the third
to the fourth, c.


We have placed these definitions in a group; but their order
is inverted, and, as we shall see, Def. xii. is a theorem, and x.
and xi. are only inferences from it.

1. If we have two ratios, such as  and , and if we
convert each ratio into a fraction, and multiply these fractions
together, we get a result which is called the ratio compounded of
the two ratios; viz. in this example it is , or . It is
evident we get the same result if we multiply the two antecedents
together for a new antecedent, and the two consequents for a
new consequent. Hence we have the following definition:-"The
ratio compounded of any number of ratios it the ratio of
the product of all the antecedents to the product of all the consequents."

2. To prove the theorem contained in Def. xii.

Let the magnitudes be , , , . Then the ratio of
*
Hence the ratio compounded of the ratio of 1st  2nd, of 2nd  3rd,
of 3rd  4th




3. If three magnitudes be proportional, the ratio of the 1st  3rd
is equal to the square of the ratio of the 1st  2nd. For the ratio
of the 1st  3rd is compounded of the ratio of the 1st  2nd, and
of the ratio of the 2nd  3rd; and since these ratios are equal,
the ratio compounded of them will be equal to the square of one
of them.

Or thus: Let the proportionals be , , , that is, let ;
hence we have



And multiplying each by , we get



or -that is, 1st  3rd  square of 1st  square of 2nd.
Now, the ratio of 1st  3rd is, by Def. x., the duplicate ratio of
1st  2nd. Hence the duplicate ratio of two magnitudes means
the square of their ratio, or, what is the same thing, the ratio of
their squares (see Book VI. xx.).

4. If four magnitudes be continual proportionals, the ratio of
1st  4th is equal to the cube of the ratio of 1st  2nd. This may
be proved exactly like 3. Hence we see that what Euclid calls
triplicate ratio of two magnitudes is the ratio of their cubes, or
the cube of their ratio.

We also see that there is no necessity to introduce extraneous
magnitudes for the purpose of defining duplicate and triplicate
ratios, as Euclid does. In fact, the definitions by squares and
cubes are more explicit.
footnotesize

xiii. In proportionals, the antecedent terms are
called homologous to one another; as also the consequents
to one another.

If one proportion be given, from it an indefinite number of
other proportions can be inferred, and a great part of the theory
of proportion consists in proving the truth of these derived proportions.
Geometers make use of certain technical terms to
denote the most important of these processes. We shall indicate
these terms by including them in parentheses in connexion with
the Propositions to which they refer. They are useful as indicating,
by one word, the whole enunciation of a theorem.
footnotesize

Every Proposition in the Fifth Book is a Theorem.


PROP. I.-Theorem.If any number of magnitudes of the same kind ,
be equimultiples of as many others ,
then the sum of the first magnitudes  shall
be the same multiple of the sum of the second which any
magnitude of the first system is of the corresponding magnitude
of the second system.

Dem.-Let  denote the multiple which the magnitudes
of the first system are of those of the second
system.
*
&Then we have &
   & a = ma'  (hyp.),
&Then we have &

&& & b = mb',  &&

&& & c = mc'.  &&

&& & c., c.  &&
Hence, by addition,




PROP. II.-Theorem.If two magnitudes of the same kind  be the same
multiples of another  which two corresponding magnitudes
 are of another , then the sum of the two
first is the same multiple of their submultiple which the
sum of their corresponding magnitudes is of their submultiple.

Dem.-Let  and  be the multiples which  and 
are of .

Then we have
*
Therefore
*
Hence  is the same multiple of  that  is of .

This Proposition is evidently true for any number of
multiples.

PROP. III.-Theorem.If two magnitudes  be equimultiples of two others
; then any equimultiples of the first magnitudes
 will be also equimultiples of the second magnitudes
.

Dem.-Let  denote the multiples which ,  are of
, ; then we have
*
Hence, multiplying each equation by , we get
*
Hence, ,  are equimultiples of , .

PROP. IV.-Theorem.If four magnitudes be proportional, and if any equimultiples
of the first and third be taken, and any other
equimultiples of the second and fourth; then the multiple
of the first  the multiple of the second  the multiple of
the third  the multiple of the fourth.

Let ; then .

Dem.-We have (hyp.);
*
&therefore &
   ab &= cd.  &therefore &
Hence, multiplying each fraction by , we get
&& manb &= mcnd;
therefore. therefore 

PROP. V.-Theorem.If two magnitudes of the same kind  be the same
multiples of another  which two corresponding magnitudes
 are of another , then the difference of the
two first is the same multiple of their submultiple ,
which the difference of their corresponding magnitudes is
of their submultiple  (compare Proposition ii.).

Dem.-Let  and  be the multiples which  and 
are of .
*
&Then we have &
   &  a = mc,  and   a' = mc',
&Then we  have &


&& &  b = nc,  and   b' = nc'.  &&

Therefore , and .
Hence  is the same multiple of  that  is of .

Cor.-If ,;for if ,
.

PROP. VI.-Theorem.If a magnitude  be the same multiple of another ,
which a magnitude  taken from the first is of a magnitude
 taken from the second, the remainder is the
same multiple of the remainder that the whole is of the
whole (compare Proposition i.).

Dem.-Let  denote the multiples which the magnitudes
,  are of , ; then we have
*
&&  a  &= mb ,  &Hence &

&&  a' &= mb'.  &&

&Hence & (a-a') &= m(b-b').  &&

Prop. A.-Theorem (Simson).If two ratios be equal, then according as the antecedent
of the first ratio is greater than, equal to, or less than its
consequent, the antecedent of the second ratio is greater
than, equal to, or less than its consequent.
Dem.-Let ; 

then then 

and if  be greater than ,  is greater than unity;
therefore  is greater than unity, and  is greater
than .

In like manner, if  be equal to ,  is equal to ,
and if less, less.


Prop. B.-Theorem (Simson).If two ratios are equal their reciprocals are equal invertendo.

Let 
Let
*
&Dem.-Since &
  a : b &:: c : d;  &Dem.-Since &


&then &
  ab &= cd; &&


&therefore &
  1 ab &= 1 cd,  &&


&or &
  ba &= dc  &&


&Hence &
  b : a &:: d : c.  &&

Prop. C.-Theorem (Simson).If the first of four magnitudes be the same multiple of
the second which the third is of the fourth, the first is to
the second as the third is to the fourth.

Let , ; then .
Let 

Dem.-Since , we have .
Dem.-Since 

In like manner, ; therefore .
*
&Hence &&
 a : b :: c : d.  &Hence &

Prop. D.-Theorem (Simson).If the first be to the second as to the third is to the
fourth, and if the first be a multiple or submultiple of
the second, the third is the same multiple or submultiple
of the fourth.

1. Let , and let  be a multiple of ,
then  is the same multiple of .

Dem.-Let , then ;

but ; therefore , and .but 

2. Let , then ;
*
&therefore & cd &= 1n, &&therefore 


&Hence &     c &= dn.  &&

PROP. VII.-Theorem.1. Equal magnitudes have equal ratios to the same
magnitude.
2. The same magnitude has equal ratios to equal magnitudes.

Let  and  be equal magnitudes, and  any other
magnitude.
*
Then 1. &&
  a : c &:: b : c,
&&Then 1.


 2. &&
  c : a &:: c : b.  &&


Dem.-Since , dividing each by , we have



therefore .therefore

Again, since , dividing  by each, we have



therefore .therefore
Observation.-2 follows at once from 1 by Proposition B.

PROP. VIII.-Theorem.. Of two unequal magnitudes, the greater has a greater
ratio to any third magnitude than the less has; . any
third magnitude has a greater ratio to the less of two unequal
magnitudes than it has to the greater.

1. Let  be greater than , and let  be any other
magnitude of the same kind, then the ratio  is
greater than the ratio .

Dem.-Since  is greater than , dividing each by ,



therefore the ratio  is greater than the ratio .

2. To prove that the ratio  is greater than the
ratio .

Dem.-Since  is less than , the quotient which is
the result of dividing any magnitude by  is greater
than the quotient which is got by dividing the same
magnitude by ;
*
&therefore & cb is greater than ca. &therefore&
Hence the ratio  is greater than the ratio .

PROP. IX.-Theorem.Magnitudes which have equal ratios to the same magnitude
are equal to one another; . magnitudes to which
the same magnitude has equal ratios are equal to one
another.

1. If , to prove .
*
&Dem.-Since&
a : c & :: b : c,
&&Dem.-Since

&&  ac & = bc.  &&
Hence, multiplying each by , we get .

2. If , to prove .
*
&Dem.-Since &
  c : a &:: c : b,
&&Dem.-Since

&by inversion, &
  a : c &:: b : c; &&  

&therefore &
      a &= b. [1]. &&

PROP. X.-Theorem.Of two unequal magnitudes, that which has the greater
ratio to any third is the greater of the two; and that to
which any third has the greater ratio is the less of the
two.

1. If the ratio  be greater than the ratio ,
to prove  greater than .

Dem.-Since the ratio  is greater than the ratio
,



Hence, multiplying each by , we get  greater than .


2. If the ratio  is greater than the ratio , to
prove  is less than .

Dem.-Since the ratio  is greater than the ratio
,



*
&Hence &
1 cb & is less than  1 ca,  &&that is, 

&that is, &
bc & is less than  ac.  &&
Hence, multiplying each by , we get




PROP. XI.-Theorem.Ratios that are equal to the same ratio are equal to one another.

Let , and , to prove .

Dem.-Since , Dem.-Since
*
&&  ab &= ef.  &&In like manner, 

&In like manner, &
    cd &= ef.  &&

&Hence &
    ab &= cd [I., Axiom i.],  &&

&and &
a :& b :: c : d.

PROP. XII.-Theorem.If any number of ratios be equal to one another, any
one of these equal ratios is equal to the ratio of the sum
of all the antecedents to the sum of all the consequents.

Let the ratios , , , be all equal to one
another; it is required to prove that any of these
ratios is equal to the ratio .

Dem.-By hypotheses,



Since these fractions are all equal, let their common
value be ; then we have
*
&&  ab = r,cd &= r,ef = r; &&

&therefore &
    a &= br,  &&therefore 

&&  c &= dr,  &&

&&  e &= fr;  &&

&therefore &  a + c + e &= (b + d + f)r.  &&
*
&Hence &
&  a + c + eb + d + f = r;  &&therefore 

&therefore &
&  ab = a + c + eb + d +f,  &&

&and &
   a : b ::& a + c + e : b + d + f.  &&

Cor.-With the same hypotheses, if , ,  be any
three multipliers, .


PROP. XIII.-Theorem.If two ratios are equal, and if one of them be greater
than any third ratio, then the other is also greater than
that third ratio.

If , but the ratio of  greater than
the ratio of ; then the ratio of  is greater than
the ratio of .

Dem.-Since the ratio of  is greater than the
ratio of ,



*
&Again, since &
   a &: b :: c : d,  &&Again, since 

&& &ab = cd;  &&
*
&therefore &
&ab  is greater than  ef. &&therefore 
or the ratio of  is greater than the ratio of .

PROP. XIV.-Theorem.If two ratios be equal, then, according as the antecedent
of the first ratio is greater than, equal to, or less than the
antecedent of the second, the consequent of the first is
greater than, equal to, or less than the consequent of the
second.

Let ; then if  be greater than ,  is
greater than ; if equal, equal; if less, less.
*
&Dem.-Since &
a : b &:: c : d. &&Dem.

&we have &
ab &= cd,  &&
and multiplying each by  we get
*
&&    ab bc
= & cd bc,      &&

&or &        ac = & bd;  &&

&therefore &      a : c :: & b : d.  &&therefore 
Hence, Proposition [A], if  be greater than ,  is
greater than ; if equal, equal; and if less, less.

PROP. XV.-Theorem.Magnitudes have the same ratio which all equimultiples of them have.

Let ,  be two magnitudes, then the ratio  is
equal to the ratio .

Dem.-The ratio , and the ratio of ; but since the value of a fraction is not altered
by multiplying its numerator and denominator by the
same number,
*
&&  ab &=  mamb;  &&

&therefore &
          a : b &:: ma : mb.  &&therefore 

PROP. XVI-Theorem.If four magnitudes of the same kind be proportionals they
are also proportionals by alternation alternando.

Let , then . indent Let 


Dem.-Since , Dem.-Since 



and multiplying each by , we get
*
&&  ab . bc
 &= cd . bc,  &&therefore 

&or &         ac &= bd;  &&

&therefore &        a : c &:: b : d.  &&

PROP. XVII.-Theorem.If four magnitudes be proportional, the difference between
the first and second  the second  the difference between
the third and fourth  the fourth dividendo.

Let  then ;
Let 
*
&Dem.-Since &
                     a : b           &:: c : d,  &&Dem.-Since 

&&                   ab     &= cd;      &&

&therefore &  ab - 1 &= cd - 1,  &&

&or &         a-bb   &= c-dd;    &&

&therefore &  a-b : b         &:: c-d : d.         &&

PROP. XVIII.-Theorem.If four magnitudes be proportionals, the sum of the
first and second  the second  the sum of the third and
fourth  the fourth componendo.

Let ; then . Let 
*
&Dem.-Since &
    a: b ::& c : d,  &&Dem.-Since 

&&  ab =& cd;  &&

&therefore &
    ab + 1 =& cd + 1,  &&

&or &
    a+bb =& c+dd;  &&

&therefore &
    a+b : b ::& c+d : d.  &&

PROP. XIX.-Theorem.If a whole magnitude be to another whole at a magnitude
taken from the first it to a magnitude taken from
the second, the first remainder  the second remainder 
the first whole  the second whole.

Let ,  and  being less than  and ;

then . then 
*
&Dem.-Since &
    a : b &:: c : d,  &&Dem.-Since 

&then &
    a : c &:: b : d  [alternando],  &&

&and &
    c : a &:: d : b  [invertendo];  &&

&therefore &
    ca &= db,  &&

&and &
    1 - ca &= 1 - db,  &&

&or &
    a-ca &= b-db.  &&

&Hence &
    a-c :& b-d :: a : b.  &&

Prop. E.-Theorem (Simson).If four magnitudes be proportional, the first  its excess
above the second  the third  its excess above the fourth
convertendo.

Let ; then .
*
&Dem.-Since &
    a : b &:: c : d,  &&Dem.-Since 

&&  ab &= cd;  &&

&therefore &
    a-bb &= c-dd   [Dem. of xvii.],  &&

&therefore &
    ab a-bb &= cd c-dd,  &&

&or &
    aa-b &= cc-d,  &&

&therefore &
    a : a-b &:: c : c-d.  &&

PROP. XX.-Theorem.If there be two sets of three magnitudes, which taken
two by two in direct order have equal ratios, then if the
first of either set be greater than the third, the first of
the other set is greater than the third; if equal, equal;
and if less, less.

Let , , ; , ,  be the two sets of magnitudes,
and let the ratio , and ; then,
if  be greater than, equal to, or less than ,  will be
greater than, equal to, or less than .
*
&Dem.-Since &
   a &: b :: a' : b',  &&Dem.-Since 

&we have &
&  ab = a'b',  &&

&In like manner, &
&  bc = b'c',  &&

&Hence &
   ab & bc = a'b' b'c',  &&

&or &
&  ac = a'c'.  &&

Therefore if  be greater than ,  is greater than ;
if equal, equal; and if less, less.


PROP. XXI.-Theorem.If there be two sets of three magnitudes, which taken
two by two in transverse order have equal ratios; then,
if the first of either set be greater than the third, the first
of the other set is greater than the third; if equal, equal;
and if less, less.

Let , , ; , ,  be the two sets of magnitudes,
and let the ratio , and . Then,
if  be greater than, equal to, or less than ,  will
be greater than, equal to, or less than .
*
&Dem.-Since &
  a : b ::& b' : c',  &&Dem.-Since 

&we have &
  ab =& b'c'.  &&

&In like manner, &
  bc =& a'b'.  &&

&Hence, multiplying &
  ac =& a'c'.  &&

Therefore, if  be greater than ,  is greater than ;
if equal, equal; if less, less.

PROP. XXII.-Theorem.If there be two sets of magnitudes, which, taken two by
two in direct order, have equal ratios, then the first  the
last of the first set  the first  the last of the second set
"ex aequali," or "ex aequo".

Let , , ; , ,  be the two sets of magnitudes,
and if , and , then .
*
&Dem.-Since &
  a : b ::& a' : b',  &&Dem.-Since 

&we have &
  ab =& a'b'  &&

&In like manner, &
  bc =& b'c'.  &&

&Hence, multiplying, &
  ac =& a'c'.  &&

&Therefore &
  a : c ::& a': c',  &&
and similarly for any number of magnitudes in each
set.

Cor. 1.-If the ratio  be equal to the ratio ,
then , ,  will be in continued proportion, and so will
, , . Hence [Def. xii. Annotation 3],




*
&but &
  ac &= a'c'.  &&[xxii.]Therefore 


&Therefore &
  a^2b^2 &= a'^2b'^2.  &&
*
&Hence, if &
    a     &: b :: a' : b',  &&Hence, if 

&&  a^2 &: b^2  :: a'^2 : b'^2  &&
Or if four magnitudes be proportional, their squares are
proportional.

Cor. 2.-If four magnitudes be proportional, their
cubes are proportional.

PROP. XXIII.-Theorem.If there be two sets of magnitudes, which, taken two
by two in transverse order, have equal ratios; then the
first  the last of the first set  the first  the last of the
second set "ex aequo perturbato".

Let , , ; , ,  be the two sets of magnitudes,
and let the ratio , and ; then
.
*
&Dem.-Since &
  a : b ::& b': c',  &&Hence, multiplying, 

&we have &
  ab =& b'c'.  &&

&In like manner,&
  bc =& a'b'.  &&

&Hence, multiplying, &
  ac =& a'c';  &&

&therefore &
  a : c ::& a' : c',  &&
and similarly for any number of magnitudes in each
set.

This Proposition and the preceding one may be included
in one enunciation, thus: "Ratios compounded
of equal ratios are equal."

PROP. XXIV.-Theorem.If two magnitudes of the same kind  have to
a third magnitude  ratios equal to those which two
other magnitudes  have to a third , then the sum
 of the first two has the same ratio to their third 
which the sum  of the other two magnitudes has to
their third .-2
*
&Dem.-Since &
  a : c &:: a' : c',  &&therefore, adding, 

&we have &
  ac &= a'c'.  &&

&In like manner, &
  bc &= b'c';  &&

&therefore, adding,&
  a+bc &= a'+b'c'.  &&

&Hence &
  a + b : c &:: a' + b' : c'.  &&

PROP. XXV.-Theorem.If four magnitudes of the same kind be proportionals,
the sum of the greatest and least is greater than the sum
of the other two.

Let ; then, if  be the greatest,  will
be the least [xiv. and a]. It is required to prove that
 is greater than .
*
&Dem.-Since &
  &a : b :: c : d,  &&therefore 

&&
  &a : c :: b : d   [alternando];  &&

&therefore &
  &a : a - c :: b : b - d   [E].;  &&

&but &
  &a   is greater than   b   (hyp.),  &&

&therefore &
  &a - c   is greater than   b - d  [xiv.]. &&

&Hence &
  &a + d   is greater than   b + c.  &&


Questions for Examination on Book V.


1. What is the subject-matter of this book?

2. When is one magnitude said to be a multiple of another?

3. What is a submultiple or measure?

4. What are equimultiples?

5. What is the ratio of two commensurable magnitudes?

6. What is meant by the ratio of incommensurable magnitudes?

7. Give an Illustration of the ratio of incommensurables.

8. What are the terms of a ratio called?

9. What is a ratio of greater inequality?

10. What is a ratio of lesser inequality?

11. What is the product of two ratios called? Ans. The ratio
compounded of these ratios.


12. What is duplicate ratio?

13. What is Euclid's definition of duplicate ratio?

14. Give another definition.

15. Define triplicate ratio.

16. What is proportion?  Ans. equality of ratios.

17. Give Euclid's definition of proportion.

18. How many ratios in a proportion?

19. What are the Latin terms in use to denote some of the
Propositions of Book V.?

20. When is a line divided harmonically?

21. When a line is divided harmonically, what are corresponding
pairs of points called? Ans. Harmonic conjugates.

22. What are reciprocal ratios?

23. Give one enunciation that will include Propositions xxii.,
xxiii. of Book V.
footnotesize

Exercises on Book V.


Def. I.-A ratio whose antecedent is greater than its consequent
is called a ratio of greater inequality; and a ratio whose
antecedent is less than its consequent, a ratio of lesser inequality.
Def. II.-A right line is said to be cut harmonically when it is
divided internally and externally in any ratios that are equal in
magnitude.

1. A ratio of greater inequality is increased by diminishing its
terms by the same quantity, and diminished by increasing its
terms by the same quantity.

2. A ratio of lesser inequality is diminished by diminishing its
terms by the same quantity, and increased by increasing its terms
by the same quantity.

3. If four magnitudes be proportionals, the sum of the first and
second is to their difference as the sum of the third and fourth is
to their difference (componendo et dividendo).

4. If two sets of four magnitudes be proportionals, and if we
multiply corresponding terms together, the products are proportionals.

5. If two sets of four magnitudes be proportionals, and if we
divide corresponding terms, the quotients are proportionals.

6. If four magnitudes be proportionals, their squares, cubes,
c., are proportionals.

7. It two proportions have three terms of one respectively
equal to three corresponding terms of the other, the remaining
term of the first is equal to the remaining term of the second.

8. If three magnitudes be continual proportionals, the first is
to the third as the square of the difference between the first and
second is to the square of the difference between the second and
third.

9. If a line , cut harmonically in  and , be bisected in
; prove , ,  are continual proportionals.

10. In the same case, if  be the middle point of ; prove
.

11. And ,  or
.

12. And , or
.

13. And .
footnotesize


BOOK VIApplication of the Theory of Proportion

i. Similar Rectilineal Figures are those whose several
angles are equal, each to each, and whose sides about
the equal angles are proportional.


Similar figures agree in shape; if they agree also in size, they
are congruent.

1. When the shape of a figure is given, it is said to be given
in species. Thus a triangle whose angles are given is given in
species. Hence similar figures are of the same species.

2. When the size of a figure is given, it is said to be given
in magnitude; for instance, a square whose side is of given
length.

3. When the place which a figure occupies is known, it is said
to be given in position.
footnotesize

ii. A right line is said to be cut at a point in
extreme and mean ratio when the whole line is to
the greater segment as the greater segment is to the
less.

iii. If three quantities of the same kind be in continued
proportion, the middle term is called a mean
proportional between the other two.

Magnitudes in continued proportion are also said to
be in geometrical progression.

iv. If four quantities of the same kind be in continued
proportion, the two middle terms are called
two mean proportionals between the other two.


v. The altitude of any figure is the length of the
perpendicular from its highest point to its base.

vi. Two corresponding angles of two figures have
the sides about them reciprocally proportional, when
a side of the first is to a side of the second as the
remaining side of the second is to the remaining side
of the first.


This is evidently equivalent to saying that a side of the first is
to a side of the second in the reciprocal ratio of the remaining
side of the first to the remaining side of the second.
footnotesize

PROP. I.-Theorem.Triangles  and parallelograms 
which have the same altitude are to one another as their
bases .

1906f169

Dem.-Produce  both ways, and cut off any number
of parts , ,
c., each equal to
, and any number
, , each
equal to . Join
, , , .

Now, since the several bases , ,  are all
equal, the triangles , ,  are also all equal
[I. xxxviii.]. Therefore the triangle  is the
same multiple of  that the base  is of the base
. In like manner, the triangle  is the same
multiple of  that the base  is of the base ;
and it is evident that [I. xxxviii.] if the base  be
greater than , the triangle  is greater than
; if equal, equal; and if less, less. Now we
have four magnitudes: the base  is the first, the
base  the second, the triangle  the third, and
the triangle  the fourth. We have taken equimultiples
of the first and third, namely, the base
, and the triangle ; also equimultiples of the
second and fourth, namely, the base , and the triangle
; and we have proved that according as the
multiple of the first is greater than, equal to, or less
than the multiple of the second, the multiple of the
third is greater than, equal to, or less than the multiple
of the fourth. Hence [V. Def. v.] the base
  the triangle  .

2. The parallelogram  is double of the triangle 
[I. xxxiv.], and the parallelogram  is double of the
triangle . Hence [V. xv.]  the triangle
; but  (Part I.).
Therefore [V. xi.]  the base .


Or thus: Let ,  denote the areas of the triangles , ,
respectively, and  their common altitude; then [II. i., Cor. 1],
*
&&  & A = 12 P.BC, A' = 12 P.CD.  &&Hence 

&Hence &
    &AA' = BCCD, or  A : A' :: BC : CD.  &&

In extending this proof to parallelograms we have only to use
 instead of .
footnotesize

PROP. II.-Theorem.If a line  be parallel to a side  of a triangle
, it divides the remaining sides, measured from the
opposite angle , proportionally; and, conversely, If
two sides of a triangle, measured from an angle, be cut
proportionally, the line joining the points of section is
parallel to the third side.

958f170

1. It is required to prove that
.

Dem.-Join , . The triangles
,  are on the same
base , and between the same parallels
, . Hence [I. xxxvii.] they
are equal, and therefore [V. vii.] the
triangle ;
*
&but &
  ADE &: BDE :: AD : DB     [i.],  &&Hence 

&and &
  ADE &: CDE :: AE : EC   [i.].  &&

&Hence &
  AD &: DB :: AE : EC.  &&

2. If , it is required to prove
that  is parallel to .

Dem.-Let the same construction be made;
*
&then &
&  AD : DB :: the triangle  ADE : BDE     [i.].  &&Hence 

&and &
&  AE : EC :: the triangle  ADE : CDE   [i.];  &&

&but &
&  AD : DB :: AE : EC  (hyp.).  &&

&Hence &
&  ADE : BDE :: ADE : CDE.  &&
Therefore [V. ix.] the triangle  is equal to ,
and they are on the same base , and on the same
side of it; hence they are between the same parallels
[I. xxxix.]. Therefore  is parallel to .


Observation.-The line  may cut the sides ,  produced
through , , or through the angle ; but evidently a
separate figure for each of these cases is unnecessary.
footnotesize

Exercise.


If two lines be cut by three or more parallels, the intercepts
on one are proportional to the corresponding intercepts on the
other.
footnotesize

PROP. III.-Theorem.If a line  bisect any angle  of a triangle ,
it divides the opposite side  into segments proportional
to the adjacent sides. Conversely, If the segments
 into which a line  drawn from any angle
 of a triangle divides the opposite side be proportional
to the adjacent sides, that line bisects the angle .

1088f171

Dem.-1. Through  draw  parallel to , to
meet  produced in . Because  meets the
parallels , , the angle  [I. xxix.] is equal
to ; and because  meets the parallels , ,
the angle  is equal to ;
but the angle  is equal to
 (hyp.); therefore the angle
 is equal to ; therefore
 is equal to  [I. vi.]. Again,
because  is parallel to , one
of the sides of the triangle ,
 [ii.]; but
 has been proved equal to .  Therefore
.

2. If , the angle  is bisected.

Dem.-Let the same construction be made.

Because  is parallel to , 
[ii.]; but  (hyp.). Therefore
[V. xi.] , and hence [V. ix.] 
is equal to ; therefore the angle  is equal to
; but  is equal to  [I. xxix.], and 
to ; hence  is equal to , and the line 
bisects the angle .

Exercises.

1429f172


1. If the line  bisect the external vertical angle ,
, and conversely.

Dem.-Cut off . Join
. Then the triangles ,
 are evidently congruent;
therefore the angle  is bisected;
hence [iii.] ; or .

2. Exercise 1 has been proved
by quoting Proposition iii. Prove
it independently, and prove iii. as an inference from it.

3. The internal and the external bisectors of the vertical angle
of a triangle divide the base harmonically (see Definition, p. 191).

4. Any line intersecting the legs of any angle is cut harmonically
by the internal and external bisectors of the angle.

5. Any line intersecting the legs of a right angle is cut harmonically
by any two lines through its vertex which make equal
angles with either of its sides.

6. If the base of a triangle be given in magnitude and position,
and the ratio of the sides, the locus of the vertex is a circle which
divides the base harmonically in the ratio of the sides.

7. If , ,  denote the sides of a triangle , and ,  the
points where the internal and external bisectors of  meet ;
prove




8. In the same case, if , , ,  be points similarly determined
on the sides , , respectively; prove

*
footnotesize

PROP. IV.-Theorem.The sides about the equal angles of equiangular triangles
 are proportional, and those which
are opposite to the equal angles are homologous.

1258f173

Dem.-Let the sides , , which are opposite to
the equal angles  and , be conceived to be placed so
as to form one continuous line,
the triangles being on the same
side, and so that the equal
angles ,  may not
have a common vertex.

Now, the sum of the angles
,  is less than two
right angles; but  is equal
to  (hyp.). Therefore the sum of the angles ,
 is less than two right angles; hence [I., Axiom
xii.] the lines ,  will meet if produced. Let them
meet in . Again, because the angle  is equal
to , the line  [I. xxviii.] is parallel to . In
like manner,  is parallel to ; therefore the figure
 is a parallelogram; hence  is equal to ,
and  is equal to . Now, because  is parallel
to ,  [ii.]; but  is equal to
, therefore ; hence [V. xvi.];
. Again, because  is parallel
to , ; but  is equal to
, therefore ; hence [V. xvi.]
. Therefore we have proved that
, and that .
Hence (ex aequali) . Therefore
the sides about the equal angles are proportional.


This Proposition may also be proved very simply by superposition.
Thus (see fig., Prop. ii.): let the two triangles be ,
; let the second triangle  be conceived to be placed on
, so that its two sides ,  may fall on the sides ,
; then, since the angle  is equal to , the side 
is parallel to . Hence [ii.] ; hence
, and [V. xvi.] .
Therefore the sides about the equal angles ,  are
proportional, and similarly for the others.

It can be proved by this Proposition that two lines which meet
at infinity are parallel. For, let  denote the point at infinity
through which the two given lines pass, and draw any two parallels
intersecting them in the points , ; , ; then the
triangles ,  are equiangular; therefore ;
but the first term of the proportion is equal to the third;
therefore [V. xiv.] the second term  is equal to the fourth
, and, being parallel to it, the lines ,  [I. xxxiii.]
are parallel.
footnotesize

Exercises.


1. If two circles intercept equal chords ,  on any secant,
the tangents ,  to the circles at the points of intersection
are to one another as the radii of the circles.

2. If two circles intercept on any secant chords that have a
given ratio, the tangents to the circles at the points of intersection
have a given ratio, namely, the ratio compounded of the
direct ratio of the radii and the inverse ratio of the chords.

3. Being given a circle and a line, prove that a point may be
found, such that the rectangle of the perpendiculars let fall on the
line from the points of intersection of the circle with any chord
through the point shall be given.

4.  is the diameter of a semicircle ;  a perpendicular
to ; draw through  a chord  of the semicircle meeting 
in , so that the ratio  may be given.
footnotesize

PROP. V.-Theorem.If two triangles  have their sides proportional
 they
are equiangular, and those angles are equal which are
subtended by the homologous sides.

15012f174

Dem.-At the points ,
 make the angles ,
 equal to the angles
,  of the triangle .
Then [I. xxxii.] the triangles
,  are equiangular.
*
&Therefore &
  BA : AC &:: ED : DG  [iv.]; 

&but &
  BA : AC &:: ED : DF  (hyp.).
Therefore  is equal to . In like manner it
may be proved that  is equal to . Hence the
triangles ,  have the sides ,  in one
equal to the sides ,  in the other, and the base
 equal to the base . Hence [I. viii.] they are
equiangular; but the triangle  is equiangular to
. Therefore the triangle  is equiangular to
.

Observation.-In VI. Def. i. two conditions are laid down
as necessary for the similitude of rectilineal figures. 1. The
equality of angles; 2. The proportionality of sides. Now, from
Propositions iv. and v., we see that if two triangles possess either
condition, they also possess the other. Triangles are unique in
this respect. In all other rectilineal figures one of the conditions
may exist without the other. Thus, two quadrilaterals may
have their sides proportional without having equal angles, or
vice versa.
footnotesize


PROP. VI.-Theorem.If two triangles  have one angle  in
one equal to one angle  in the other, and the sides about
these angles proportional , the triangles
are equiangular, and have those angles equal which
are opposite to the homologous sides.

Dem.-Make the same construction as in the last
Proposition; then the triangles ,  are equiangular.
*
&Therefore &
  BA : AC &:: ED : DG  [iv.]; &&Therefore 

&but &
  BA : AC &:: ED : DF  (hyp.).  &&
Therefore  is equal to . Again, because the
angle  is equal to  (const.), and  equal
to  (hyp.), the angle  is equal to ; and
it has been proved that  is equal to , and 
is common; hence the triangles  and  are
equiangular; but  is equiangular to . Therefore
 is equiangular to .


[It is easy to see, as in the case of Proposition iv., that an
immediate proof of this Proposition can also be got from Proposition
ii.].
footnotesize

Cor. 1.-If the ratio of two sides of a triangle be
given, and the angle between them, the triangle is
given in species.

PROP. VII.-Theorem.If two triangles  have one angle  one
equal to one angle  in the other, the sides about two
other angles  proportional ,
and the remaining angles  of the same species
(i. e. either both acute or both not acute), the triangles
are similar.


1489f175

Dem.-If the angles  and  are not equal, one
must be greater than the
other. Suppose  to be
the greater, and that the
part  is equal to ,
then the triangles ,
 have two angles in
one equal to two angles
in the other, and are
[I. xxxii.] equiangular.
*
&Therefore &
  AB : BG &:: DE : EF  [iv.]; 

&but &
  AB : BC &:: DE : EF  (hyp.).
Therefore  is equal to . Hence the angles
,  must be each acute [I. xvii.]; therefore
 must be obtuse; hence , which is equal
to it, is obtuse; and it has been proved that  is
acute; therefore the angles ,  are of different
species; but (hyp.) they are of the same species, which
is absurd. Hence the angles  and  are not unequal,
that is, they are equal. Therefore the triangles are equiangular.

Cor. 1.-If two triangles ,  have two sides
in one proportional to two sides in the other, , and the angles ,  opposite one pair of
homologous sides equal, the angles ,  opposite the
other are either equal or supplemental. This Proposition
is nearly identical with vii.

Cor. 2.-If either of the angles ,  be right, the
other must be right.

PROP. VIII.-Theorem.The triangles  into which a right-angled
triangle  is divided, by the perpendicular  from
the right angle  on the hypotenuse, are similar to the
whole and to one another.


Dem.-Since the two triangles ,  have the
angle  common, and the angles
,  equal, each being
right, they are [I. xxxii.] equiangular;
hence [iv.] they are
similar. In like manner it may
be proved that  is similar
to . Hence ,  are
each similar to , and therefore they are similar to one
another.

1106f176

Cor. 1.-The perpendicular  is a mean proportional
between the segments ,  of the hypotenuse.

For, since the triangles ,  are equiangular,
we have ; hence  is a mean
proportional between ,  (Def. iii.).

Cor. 2.- is a mean proportional between ,
; and  between , .

Cor. 3.-The segments ,  are in the duplicate
of , or in other words, ,

Cor. 4.- in the duplicate ratios of ;
and  in the duplicate ratio of .

PROP. IX.-Problem.From a given right line  to cut off any part required
(i.e. to cut off any required submultiple.

Sol.-Let it be required, for instance, to cut off the
fourth part. Draw , making any angle with ,
and in  take any point , and cut off (I. iii.) the
parts , ,  each equal to . Join , and
draw  parallel to .  is the fourth part of
.


1156f177

Dem.-Since  is parallel to the side  of the
triangle ,  [ii.]; but  is the fourth
part of  (const.). Hence 
is the fourth part of  [V., d.].
In the same manner, any other required
submultiple may be cut off.

Proposition x., Book I., is a particular case of this
Proposition.

PROP. X.-Problem.To divide a given undivided line  similarly to a given
divided line .

1408f178

Sol.-Draw , making any angle with , and
cut off the parts , , 
respectively equal to the
parts , ,  of the
given divided line . Join
, and draw , , each
parallel to .  will be
divided similarly to .

Dem.-Through  draw
 parallel to , cutting  in . Now in the
triangle ,  is parallel to . Hence [ii.]
, that is  (const.).
Again, in the triangle ,  is parallel to .
Therefore [ii.] ; but [I. xxxiv.]
 is equal to ,  is equal to ,  is equal
to , and  is equal to  (const.). Therefore
. Hence the line  is divided
similarly to the line .

Exercises.


1. To divide a given line  internally or externally in the
ratio of two given lines, , .

250f179

Sol.-Through  and  draw any two parallels  and  in
opposite directions. Cut off , and , and join
; the joining line will divide  internally at  in the ratio
of .

2. If  be drawn in the same direction with , as denoted
by the dotted line, then  will cut  externally at  in the
ratio of .

Cor.-The two points ,  divide  harmonically.

This problem is manifestly equivalent to the following:-Given
the sum or difference of two lines and their ratio, to find
the lines.

3. Any line , through the middle point  of the base 
of a triangle , is cut harmonically by the sides of the
triangle and a parallel to the base through the vertex.

4. Given the sum of the squares on two lines and their ratio;
find the lines.

5. Given the difference of the squares on two lines and their
ratio; find the lines.

6. Given the base and ratio of the sides of a triangle; construct
it when any of the following data is given:-1, the area;
2, the difference on the squares of the sides; 3, the sum of the
squares on the sides; 4, the vertical angle; 5, the difference of
the base angles.
footnotesize

PROP. XI.-Problem.To find a third proportional to two given lines .

Sol.-Draw any two lines ,  making an angle.
Cut off  equal ,  equal , and  equal .
Join , and draw  parallel to , then  is the
third proportional required.


1757f180

Dem.-In the triangle ,  is parallel to
; therefore  [ii.]; but
 is equal to , and
,  each equal to
. Therefore . Hence 
is a third proportional to  and .


Another solution can be inferred from Proposition viii. For if
,  in that Proposition be respectively equal to  and ,
then  will be the third proportional. Or again, if in the diagram,
Proposition viii., , and ,  will be the
third proportional. Hence may be inferred a method of continuing
the proportion to any number of terms.
footnotesize

Exercises.


1807f181

1. If  be a triangle, having the side  greater than ;
then if we cut off , draw  parallel
to , cut off ,
c., the series of lines
, , , c., are
in continual proportion.

2. .  This is evident
by drawing through  a parallel to .
footnotesize

PROP. XII.-Problem.To find a fourth proportional to three given lines
.

1808f182

Sol.-Draw any two lines , , making an
angle; then cut off
 equal , 
equal ,  equal
.  Join , and
draw  parallel
to .   will
be the fourth proportional
required.


Dem.-Since  is parallel to , we have [ii.]
; therefore .
Hence  is a fourth proportional to , , .

1107f183

Or thus: Take two lines ,
 intersecting in . Make , , , and describe
a circle through the points
, ,  [IV. v.] cutting  in .
 will be the fourth proportional
required.

The demonstration is evident
from the similarity of the triangles  and .

PROP. XIII.-Problem.To find a mean proportional between two given lines.
.

2107f184

Sol.-Take on any line  parts ,  respectively
equal to , .
On  describe a
semicircle .
Erect  at right
angles to ,
meeting the semicircle
in .
 will be the mean proportional required.

Dem.-Join , . Since  is a semicircle,
the angle  is right [III. xxxi.]. Hence, since
 is a right-angled triangle, and  a perpendicular
from the right angle on the hypotenuse,  is a
mean proportional [viii. Cor. 1] between , ; that
is,  is a mean proportional between  and .


Exercises.


1. Another solution may be inferred from Proposition viii.,
Cor. 2.

2. If through any point within a circle the chord be drawn,
which is bisected in that point, its half is a mean proportional
between the segments of any other chord passing through the
same point.

3. The tangent to a circle from any external point is a mean
proportional between the segments of any secant passing through
the same point.

4. If through the middle point  of any arc of a circle any
secant be drawn cutting the chord of the arc in , and the circle
again in , the chord of half the arc is a mean proportional between
 and .

5. If a circle be described touching another circle internally
and two parallel chords, the perpendicular from the centre of the
former on the diameter of the latter, which bisects the chords,
is a mean proportional between the two extremes of the three
segments into which the diameter is divided by the chords.

6. If a circle be described touching a semicircle and its diameter,
the diameter of the circle is a harmonic mean between the segments
into which the diameter of the semicircle is divided at the
point of contact.

7. State and prove the Proposition corresponding to Ex. 5, for
external contact of the circles.
footnotesize

PROP. XIV.-Theorem.. Equiangular parallelograms   which are
equal in area have the sides about the equal angles reciprocally
proportional-.
. Equiangular parallelograms which have the sides
about the equal angles reciprocally proportional are equal
in area.1389f185

Dem.-Let ,  be so placed as to form one right
line, and that the equal angles
,  may be vertically
opposite. Now, since the
angle  is equal to ,
to each add , and we have
the sum of the angles ,
 equal to the sum of the
angles , ; but the
sum of ,  is [I. xiii.]
two right angles. Therefore the sum of ,  is
two right angles. Hence [I. xiv.] ,  form one
right line. Complete the parallelogram .

Again, since the parallelograms ,  are equal
(hyp.),
*
&&  AB : CF &:: CD : CF  [V. vii.];  &&

&but &
    AB : CF &:: AC : CE  [i.];  &&

&and &
  CD : CF &:: GC : CB  [i.];  &&

&therefore &
  AC : CE &:: GC:  CB;  &&therefore 
that is, the sides about the equal angles are reciprocally
proportional.

2. Let , to prove the parallelograms
,  are equal.

Dem.-Let the same construction be made, we have
*
&&  AB : CF ::& AC : CE  [i.];  &&

&and &
  CD : CF ::& GC : CB  [i.];  &&

&but &
  AC : CE ::& GC : CB  (hyp.).  &&

&Therefore &
  AB : CF ::& CD : CF.  &&therefore 

&Hence &
  AB &= CD  [V. ix.];  &&
that is, the parallelograms are equal.


Or thus: Join , , , . The  twice the
, and the  twice the . Therefore the
, and [I. xxxix.]  is parallel to . Hence




2. May be proved by reversing this demonstration.

Another demonstration of this Proposition may be got by producing
the lines  and  to meet in . Then [I. xliii.] the
points , ,  are collinear, and the Proposition is evident.
footnotesize


PROP. XV.-Theorem.. Two triangles equal in area , which
have one angle  in one equal to one angle  in the
other, have the sides about these angles reciprocally proportional.

. Two triangles, which have one angle in one equal to
one angle in the other, and the sides about these angles
reciprocally proportional, are equal in area.1008f186


Dem.-1. Let the equal angles be so placed as to be
vertically opposite, and that ,
 may form one right line; then
it may be demonstrated, as in the
last Proposition, that ,  form
one right line. Join .

Now since the triangles ,
 are equal,
*
&&  ACB &: BCD :: DCE : BCD  [V. vii.];  &&

&but &
    ACB &: BCD :: AC : CD  [i.],  &&

&and &
    DCE &: BCD :: EC : CB  [i.].  &&

&Therefore &
     AC &: CD :: EC : CB;  &&Therefore 
that is, the sides about the equal angles are reciprocally
proportional.

2. If , to prove the triangle 
equal to .

Dem.-Let the same construction be made, then we
have
*
&& AC : CD &:: triangle  ACB : BCD  [i.],  &&

&and &
   EC : CB &:: triangle  DCE : BCD  [i.];  &&

&but &
   AC : CD &:: EC : CB  (hyp.).  &&but 


Therefore the triangle



Hence the triangle  [V. ix.]-that is, the
triangles are equal.


This Proposition might have been appended as a Cor. to the
preceding, since the triangles are the halves of equiangular parallelograms,
or it may be proved by joining , and showing that
it is parallel to .
footnotesize

PROP. XVI.-Theorem.. If four right lines  be proportional,
the rectangle  contained by the extremes is equal
to the rectangle  contained by the means.

. If the rectangle contained by the extremes of four
right lines be equal to the rectangle contained by the
means, the four lines are proportional.

1759f187

Dem.-1. Erect ,  at right angles to  and
, and equal to 
and  respectively,
and complete the rectangles.
Then because

(hyp.), and that  is
equal to , and  to
 (const.), we have
.
Hence the parallelograms ,  are equiangular, and
have the sides about their equal angles reciprocally
proportional. Therefore they are [xiv.] equal; but
since  is equal to ,  is equal to the rectangle
. In like manner,  is equal to the rectangle
. Hence ; that is, the rectangle
contained by the extremes is equal to the rectangle contained
by the means.

2. If , to prove .

The same construction being made, because , and that  is equal to , and  to , we
have the parallelogram ; and since these parallelograms
are equiangular, the sides about their equal
angles are reciprocally proportional. Therefore




1007f188


Or thus: Place the four lines in a concurrent
position so that the extremes may
form one continuous line, and the means
another. Let the four lines so placed be
, , , . Join , . Then
because , and the
angle , the triangles ,
 are equiangular. Hence the four
points , , ,  are concyclic. Therefore
[III. xxxv.] .
footnotesize

PROP. XVII.-Theorem. If three right lines  be proportional, the
rectangle  contained by the extremes is equal to the
square  of the mean.

. If the rectangle contained by the extremes of three
right lines be equal to the square of the mean, the three
lines are proportional.

1186f189

Dem.-1. Assume a line ; then because , we have .
Therefore [xvi.] ; but
. Therefore ;
that is, the rectangle contained
by the extremes is equal to the
square of the mean.

2. The same construction being made, since ,
we have ; therefore ; but
. Hence ; that is, the three lines
are proportionals.


This Proposition may be inferred as a Cor. to the last, which
is one of the fundamental Propositions in Mathematics.
footnotesize


Exercises.

10012f190


1. If a line  bisect the vertical angle  of any triangle ,
its square added to the rectangle 
contained by the segments of the base is
equal to the rectangle contained by the
sides.

Dem.-Describe a circle about the triangle,
and produce  to meet it in ;
then it is easy to see that the triangles
,  are equiangular. Hence [iv.]
; therefore  [III. xxxv.].

2. If the line  bisect the external vertical angle of any triangle
, its square subtracted from the rectangle 
is equal to .

3. The rectangle contained by the diameter of the circumscribed
circle, and the radius of the inscribed circle of any triangle,
is equal to the rectangle contained by the segments of any
chord of the circumscribed circle passing through the centre of
the inscribed.

Dem.-Let  be the centre of the inscribed circle. Join 
(see foregoing fig.); let fall the perpendicular , draw the diameter
 of the circumscribed circle. Now the angle 
[III. xxvii.], and ; therefore  sum of ,
. Hence . Again, the triangles , 
are equiangular, because ,  are equal, and , 
are each right. Therefore, ; therefore
.

4. Ex. 3 may be extended to each of the escribed circles of the
triangle .

100f191

5. The rectangle contained by two sides of a triangle is equal
to the rectangle contained by the perpendicular
and the diameter of the circumscribed
circle. For, let  be the diameter.
Join . Then the triangles , 
are equiangular; hence ;
therefore .

11513f192

6. If a circle passing through one of
the angles  of a parallelogram 
intersect the two sides ,  again in
the points ,  and the diagonal  again in ; then .


Dem.-Join , , and make the angle . Then
the triangles ,  are equiangular.
Therefore .
Hence . Again, it
is easy to see that the triangles ,
 are equiangular; therefore ; hence ,
or ; but we have
proved . Hence
.

7. If ,  be parallels to the sides
of a triangle  from any point  in
the base, then . This is an easy deduction from 6.

12012f193

8. If through a point  within a
triangle  parallels , , 
to the sides be drawn, the sum of the
rectangles of their segments is equal
to the rectangle contained by the
segments of any chord of the circumscribing
circle passing through .

*
&&&Dem.-AO.AL = AB.AK + AC.AE.  && 6 

&But &   & AO^2 = AG.AK + AH.AE - GO.OH.  && 7 

&Hence & & AO.OL  = BG.AK + CH.AE + GO.OH,  && 

&or &    & AO.OL  = EO.OF + IO.OK + GO.OH.  &&

9. The rectangle contained by the side of an inscribed square
standing on the base of a triangle, and the sum of the base and
altitude, is equal to twice the area of the triangle.

10. The rectangle contained by the side of an escribed square
standing on the base of a triangle, and the difference between the
base and altitude, is equal to twice the area of the triangle.

11. If from any point  in the circumference of a circle a perpendicular
be drawn to any chord, its square is equal to the
rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from the extremities of
the chord on the tangent at .

12. If  be the point of intersection of the diagonals of a cyclic
quadrilateral , the four rectangles , ,
, , are proportional to the four lines , ,
, .

10811f194

13. The sum of the rectangles of the opposite sides of a cyclic
quadrilateral  is equal to the rectangle
contained by its diagonals.

Dem.-Make the angle ;
then the triangles ,  are equiangular;
therefore ;
therefore . Again,
the triangles ,  are equiangular,
and ; therefore
. Hence . This Proposition is known as Ptolemy's theorem.

14. If the quadrilateral  is not cyclic, prove that the
three rectangles , ,  are proportional to
the three sides of a triangle which has an angle equal to the sum
of a pair of opposite angles of the quadrilateral.

15. Prove by using Theorem 11 that if perpendiculars be let
fall on the sides and diagonals of a cyclic quadrilateral, from any
point in the circumference of the circumscribed circle, the rectangle
contained by the perpendiculars on the diagonals is equal
to the rectangle contained by the perpendiculars on either pair of
opposite sides.

16. If  be the diameter of a semicircle, and ,  chords
from any point  in the circumference, and if a perpendicular to
AB from any point  meet ,  in  and , and the semicircle
in ,  is a mean proportional between  and .
footnotesize

PROP. XVIII.-Problem.On a given right line  to construct a rectilineal
figure similar to a given one , and similarly
placed as regards any side  of the latter.

Def.-Similar figures are said to be similarly described
upon given right lines, when these lines are homologous
sides of the figures.

270f195


Sol.-Join , , and construct a triangle 
on  equiangular to , and similarly placed as
regards ; that is, make, the angle  equal to
, and  equal to . In like manner construct
the triangle  equiangular to , and similarly
placed, and lastly, the triangle  equiangular
and similarly placed with . Then  is the
figure required.

Dem.-From the construction it is evident that the
figures are equiangular, and it is only required to prove
that the sides about the equal angles are proportional.
Now because the triangle  is equiangular to ,
 [iv.]; hence the sides about the
equal angles  and  are proportional. Again, from
the same triangles we have , and
from the triangles , ; ;
therefore (ex aequali) ; that is, the
sides about the equal angles ,  are proportional,
and so in like manner are the sides about the
other equal angles. Hence (Def. i.) the figures are
similar.


Observation.-In the foregoing construction, the line  is
homologous to , and it is evident that we may take  to
be homologous to any other side of the given figure .
Again, in each case, it the figure  be turned round the line
 until it falls on the other side, it will still be similar to the
figure . Hence on a given line  there can be constructed
two figures each similar to a given figure , and having the
given line  homologous to any given side  of the given figure.

The first of the figures thus constructed is said to be directly
similar, and the second inversely similar to the given figure.
These technical terms are due to Hamilton: see "Elements of
Quaternions," page 112.
footnotesize

Cor. 1.-Twice as many polygons may be constructed
on  similar to a given polygon  as
that figure has sides.

Cor. 2.-If the figure  be applied to 
so that the point  will coincide with , and that the
line  may be placed along , then the points , , 
will be respectively on the lines , , ; also the
sides , ,  of the one polygon will be respectively
parallel to their homologous sides , , 
of the other.

Cor. 3.-If lines drawn from any point  in the
plane of a figure to all its angular points be divided in
the same ratio, the lines joining the points of division
will form a new figure similar to, and having every
side parallel to, the homologous side of the original.

PROP. XIX.-Theorem.Similar triangles  have their areas to
one another in the duplicate ratio of their homologous
sides.

1789f196

Dem.-Take  a third proportional to , 
[xi.]. Join . Then
because the triangles
,  are similar,
;
hence (alternately) ; but

(const.); therefore [V. xi.]
; hence the sides of the triangles ,  about
the equal angles ,  are reciprocally proportional;
therefore the triangles are equal. Again, since the
lines , ,  are continual proportionals, 
in the duplicate ratio of  [V. Def. x.]; but
 triangle . Therefore 
in the duplicate ratio of ; but it has been
proved that the triangle  is equal to . Therefore
the triangle  is to the triangle  in the
duplicate ratio of .

This is the first Proposition in Euclid in which the
technical term "duplicate ratio" occurs. My experience
with pupils is, that they find it very difficult to understand
either Euclid's proof or his definition. On this
account I submit the following alternative proof, which,
however, makes use of a new definition of the duplicate
ratio of two lines, viz. the ratio of the squares (see
Annotations on V. Def. x.) described on these lines.

On  and  describe squares, and through  and
 draw lines parallel to  and , and complete
the rectangles , .

Now, the triangles ,  are evidently equiangular.

210f197

*
&Hence &
  JA &: AC :: OD : DF [iv.];  &&therefore 

&but &
  AC   &: AB :: DF : DE [iv.].  &&

&Hence &
  JA &: AB :: OD : DE (ex aequali);  &&

&but &
  AB   &= AG, and DE = DL;  &&

&therefore &
  JA &: AG :: OD : DL.  &&

&Again, &
  JA &: AG :: AI : square AH [i.],  &&

&and &
  OD   &: DL :: DN : square DM [i.].  &&

&Hence &
  AI &: AH :: DN : DM;  &&

&therefore &
  AI &: DN :: AH : DM [V. xvi.];  &&

&hence & 2.  &&


Exercises.


1. If one of two similar triangles has its sides 50 per cent.
longer than the homologous sides of the other; what is the ratio
of their areas?

2. When the inscribed and circumscribed regular polygons of
any common number of sides to a circle have more than four
sides, the difference of their areas is less than the square of the
side of the inscribed polygon.
footnotesize

PROP. XX.-Theorem.Similar polygons may be divided  into the same
number of similar triangles;  the corresponding triangles
have the same ratio to one another which the
polygons have;  the polygons are to each other in the
duplicate ratio of their homologous sides.

Dem.-Let ,  be the polygons, and
let the sides ,  be homologous. Join , ,
, .

263f198

1. The triangles into which the polygons are divided
are similar. For, since the polygons are similar, they
are equiangular, and have the sides about their equal
angles proportional [Def. i.]; hence the angle  is
equal to , and ; therefore [vi.]
the triangle  is equiangular to ; hence the
angle  is equal to ; but  is equal to 
(hyp.); therefore the angle  is equal to .
Again, because the polygons are similar, ; and since the triangles ,  are similar,
; hence (ex aequali) , and the angle  has been proved to be
equal to the angle ; therefore the triangles ,
 are equiangular. In the same manner it can be
proved that the remaining triangles are equiangular.

2. Since the triangle  is similar to , we
have [xix.].



In like manner,
*
  6  

&hence &
  ABH : CDE &= AHI : CEF [V. xi.].  &&

&Similarly, &
  AHI : CEF &= AIJ : CFG.  &&Similarly, 
In these equal ratios, the triangles , , 
are the antecedents, and the triangles , , 
the consequents, and [V. xii.] any one of these equal
ratios is equal to the ratio of the sum of all the antecedents
to the sum of all the consequents; therefore
the triangle  the triangle  the polygon
 the polygon .

3. The triangle  in the duplicate ratio of
 [xix.]. Hence  the polygon  the
polygon  in the duplicate ratio of .

Cor. 1.-The perimeters of similar polygons are to
one another in the ratio of their homologous sides.

Cor. 2.-As squares are similar polygons, therefore
the duplicate ratio of two lines is equal to the ratio of
the squares described on them (compare Annotations,
V. Def. x.).

Cor. 3.-Similar portions of similar figures bear the
same ratio to each other as the wholes of the figures.

Cor. 4.-Similar portions of the perimeters of similar
figures are to each other in the ratio of the whole perimeters.


Exercises.

Def. i.-Homologous points in the planes of two
similar figures are such, that lines drawn from them
to the angular points of the two figures are proportional
to the homologous sides of the two figures.

19011f199


1. If two figures be similar, to each point in the plane of one
there will be a corresponding
point in the
plane of the other.

Dem.-Let ,
 be the two
figures,  a point in
the plane of .
Join , , and construct
a triangle 
on , similar to
; then it is easy to see that lines from  to the angular
points of  are proportional to the lines from  to the
angular points of .

17012f200

2. If two figures be directly similar, and in the same plane,
there is in the plane a special point which, regarded as belonging
to either figure, is its own
homologous point with respect
to the other. For,
let ,  be two homologous
sides of the figures,
 their point of intersection.
Through the two triads of
points , , ; , , 
describe two circles intersecting
again in the point
:  will be the point required.
For it is evident
that the triangles ,  are similar and that either may
be turned round the point , so that the two bases, , ,
will be parallel.
footnotesize

Def. ii.-The point  is called the centre of similitudeof the figures. It is also called their double point.


3. Two regular polygons of  sides each have  centres of
similitude.

4. If any number of similar triangles have their corresponding
vertices lying on three given lines, they have a common centre of
similitude.

5. If two figures be directly similar, and have a pair of homologous
sides parallel, every pair of homologous sides will be
parallel.
footnotesize

Def. iii.-Two figures, such as those in 5, are said
to be homothetic.


6. If two figures be homothetic, the lines joining corresponding
angular points are concurrent, and the point of concurrence is the
centre of similitude of the figures.

7. If two polygons be directly similar, either may be turned
round their centre of similitude until they become homothetic,
and this may be done in two different ways.

8. Two circles are similar figures.

23512f201

Dem.-Let ,  be their centres; let the angle  be
indefinitely
small, so that
the arc 
may be regarded
as a
right line;
make the
angle 
equal to ;
then the triangles
,
 are similar.

Again, make the angle  indefinitely small, and make 
equal to it; the triangles ,  are similar. Proceeding
in this way, we see that the circles can be divided into the same
number of similar elementary triangles. Hence the circles are
similar figures.

9. Sectors of circles having equal central angles are similar
figures.

10. As any two points of two circles may be regarded as homologous,
two circles have in consequence an infinite number of
centres of similitude; their locus is the circle, whose diameter is
the line joining the two points for which the two circles are
homothetic.

11. The areas of circles are to one another as the squares of
their diameters. For they are to one another as the similar
elementary triangles into which they are divided, and these are
as the squares of the radii.

12. The circumferences of circles are as their diameters
(Cor. 1).

13. The circumference of sectors having equal central angles
are proportional to their radii. Hence if ,  denote the arcs of
two sectors, which subtend equal angles at the centres, and if
,  be their radii, .

14. The area of a circle is equal to half the rectangle contained
by the circumference and the radius. This is evident by
dividing the circle into elementary triangles, as in Ex. 8.

15. The area of a sector of a circle is equal to half the rectangle
contained by the arc of the sector and the radius of the
circle.
footnotesize

PROP. XXI.-Theorem.Rectilineal figures , which are similar to the same
figure , are similar to one another.

Dem.-Since the figures  and  are similar, they
are equiangular, and have the sides about their equal
angles proportional. In like manner  and  are
equiangular, and have the sides about their equal
angles proportional. Hence  and  are equiangular,
and have the sides about their equal angles proportional.
Therefore they are similar.

230f202

Cor.-Two similar rectilineal figures which are homothetic
to a third are homothetic to one another.


Exercise.


If three similar rectilineal figures be homothetic, two by two,
their three centres of similitudes are collinear.

footnotesize


PROP. XXII-Theorem.If four lines  be proportional, and
any pair of similar rectilineal figures  be
similarly described on the first and second, and also any
pair  on the third and fourth, these figures are
proportional. Conversely, if any rectilineal figure described
on the first of four right lines: the similar and
similarly described figure described on the second  any
rectilineal figure on the third  the similar and similarly
described figure on the fourth, the four lines are proportional.

180f203

Dem. 1.-. [xx.];
*
&and &
    EI   &: GJ :: EF^2 : GH^2 [xx.]. &&therefore 

&But since &
    AB   &: CD :: EF : GH,  &&

&&  AB^2 &: CD^2 :: EF^2 : GH^2 [V. xxii., Cor. 1];  &&

&therefore &
    ABK  &: CDL :: EI : GJ.  &&

If , .
*
&3
  &Dem. 2.-&
      ABK  &: CDL :: AB^2 : CD^2  &&[xx.],  

  &and &
      EI   &: GJ :: EF^2 : GH^2   &&[xx.];  

  &therefore &
      AB^2 &: CD^2 :: EF^2 : GH^2.  &&

  &Hence &
      AB   &: CD :: EF : GH.  &&
  &&Dem. s.-

The enunciation of this Proposition is wrongly stated
in Simson's Euclid, and in those that copy it. As given
in those works, the four figures should be similar.


PROP. XXIII.-Theorem.Equiangular parallelograms  are to each
other as the rectangles contained by their sides about a
pair of equal angles.

1179f258

Dem.-Let the two sides ,  about the equal
angles , , be placed so
as to form one right line; then
it is evident, as in Prop. xiv.,
that ,  form one right
line. Complete the parallelogram
. Now, denoting the parallelograms
, ,  by ,
, , respectively, we have-
*
&&               X &: Y  :: AB : BC [i.], &&Hence 

&&               Y &: Z  :: BD : BG[i.]. &&

&Hence & XY &: YZ :: AB.BD : BC.BG;  &&

&or &     X &: Z  :: AB.BD : BC.BG.  &&


Observation.-Since  is compounded of the
two ratios  and  [V. Def. of compound ratio],
the enunciation is the same as if we said, "in the ratio compounded
of the ratios of the sides," which is Euclid's; but it is
more easily understood as we have put it.
footnotesize

Exercises.


1. Triangles which have one angle of one equal or supplemental
to one angle of the other, are to one another in the ratio
of the rectangles of the sides about those angles.

2. Two quadrilaterals whose diagonals intersect at equal
angles are to one another in the ratio of the rectangles of the
diagonals.

footnotesize


PROP. XXIV.-Theorem.In any parallelogram , every two parallelograms
 which are about a diagonal are similar to the
whole and to one another.

808f204

Dem.-Since the parallelograms ,  have a
common angle, they are equiangular
[I. xxxiv.], and all that is required to
be proved is, that the sides about the
equal angles are proportional. Now,
since the lines ,  are parallel, the
triangles ,  are equiangular;
therefore [iv.] ,
and the other sides of the parallelograms
are equal to , ; , : hence the sides
about the equal angles are proportional; therefore the
parallelograms ,  are similar. In the same manner
the parallelograms ,  are similar.

Cor.-The parallelograms , ,  are, two by
two, homothetic.

PROP. XXV.-Problem.To describe a rectilineal figure equal to a given one ,
and similar to another given one .

Sol.-On any side  of the figure  describe the
rectangle  equal to  [I. xlv.], and on  describe
the rectangle  equal to . Between , 
find a mean proportional , and on it describe the
figure  similar to  [xviii.], so that  and
 may be homologous sides.  is the figure required.

240f205

Dem.-The three lines , ,  are in continued
proportion; therefore  in the duplicate ratio
of  [V. Def. x.]; and since the figures ,
 are similar,  in the duplicate ratio
of  [xx.]; also  rectangle 
rectangle . Hence rectangle  figure
; but the rectangle  is equal to the
figure ; therefore the rectangle  is equal to
the figure ; but  is equal to  (const.). Therefore
the figure  is equal to , and it is similar to
. Hence it is the figure required.


260f206

Or thus: Describe the squares ,  equal to the
figures  and  respectively [II. xiv.]; then find  a fourth
proportional to , , and  [xii.]. On  describe the
rectilineal figure  similar to the figure  [xviii.], so that
 and  may be homologous sides.  is the figure required.

Dem.-Because  (const.), the figure
 [xxii.]; but  is equal to
 (const.); therefore  is equal to ; but  is
equal to  (const.). Therefore  is equal to , and it is similar
to .
footnotesize

PROP. XXVI.-Theorem.If two similar and similarly situated parallelograms
 have a common angle, they are about
the same diagonal.

Dem.-Draw the diagonals (see fig., Prop. xxiv.)
, . Then because the parallelograms ,
 are similar figures, they can be divided into
the same number of similar triangles [xx.]. Hence
the triangle  is similar to , and therefore
the angle  is equal to the angle . Hence
the line  must pass through the point , and therefore
the parallelograms are about the same diagonal.


Observation.-Proposition xxvi., being the converse of xxiv.,
has evidently been misplaced. The following would be a simpler
enunciation:-"If two homothetic parallelograms have a common
angle, they are about the same diagonal."
footnotesize

PROP. XXVII-Problem.To inscribe in a given triangle  the maximum
parallelogram having a common angle  with the triangle.

Sol.-Bisect the side  opposite to the angle , at
 through  draw ,  parallel to the other sides
of the triangle.  is the parallelogram required.

1408f207

Dem.-Take any other point  in  draw ,
 parallel to the sides, and  parallel to ;
produce ,  to meet
 in  and , and produce  to meet  in .

Now, since  is bisected
in ,  is also bisected
in ; hence [I. xxxvi.] the
parallelogram  is equal
to ; therefore  is
greater than ; but  is equal to  [I. xliii.];
hence  is greater than . To each add , and
we have the parallelogram  greater than .
Hence  is the maximum parallelogram which can be
inscribed in the given triangle.

Cor. 1.-The maximum parallelogram exceeds any
other parallelogram about the same angle in the triangle,
by the area of the similar parallelogram whose
diagonal is the line between the middle point  of the
opposite side and the point , which is the corner of
the other inscribed parallelogram.

Cor. 2.-The parallelograms inscribed in a triangle,
and having one angle common with it, are proportional
to the rectangles contained by the segments of the
sides of the triangle, made by the opposite corners of
the parallelograms.

Cor. 3.-The parallelogram .

PROP. XXVIII.-Problem.To inscribe in a given triangle  a parallelogram
equal to a given rectilineal figure  not greater than
the maximum inscribed parallelogram, and having an
angle  common with the triangle.

Sol.-Bisect the side  opposite to , at . Draw
,  parallel to the sides , ; then [xxvii.]  is
the maximum parallelogram that can be inscribed in the
triangle ; and if  be equal to it, the problem is
solved. If not, produce , and draw  parallel to
; then describe the parallelogram  [xxv.]
equal to the difference between the figure  and
, and similar to , and so that the sides  and
 will be homologous; then cut off  equal to ;
draw  parallel to , cutting  in , and draw
 parallel to .  is the parallelogram required.

200f208

Dem.-Since the parallelograms ,  are about
the same diagonal, they are similar [xxiv.]; but  is
similar to  (const.); therefore  is similar to ,
and (const.) their homologous sides,  and , are
equal; hence [xx.]  is equal to . Now,  is
the difference between  and  [xxvii. Cor. 1], and
 is (const.) the difference between  and ; therefore
the difference between  and  is equal to the
difference between  and ; but  is equal to .
Hence  is equal to .

PROP. XXIX.-Problem.To escribe to a given triangle  a parallelogram
equal to a given rectilineal figure , and having an
angle common with an external angle  of the triangle.

Sol.-The construction is the same as the last,
except that, instead of making the parallelogram 
equal to the excess of the parallelogram  over the
rectilineal figure , we make it equal to their sum;
and then make  equal to ; draw  parallel to
, and the rest of the construction as before.

280f209

Dem.-Now it can be proved, as in II. vi., that
the parallelogram  is equal to the gnomon ;
that is, equal to the difference between the parallelograms
 and , or the difference (const.) between
 and ; that is (const.), equal to , and  is
escribed to the triangle , and has an angle common
with the external angle . Hence the thing required
is done.


Observation.-The enunciations of the three foregoing Propositions
have been altered, in order to express them in modern
technical language. Some writers recommend the student to
omit them-we think differently. In the form we have given
them they are freed from their usual repulsive appearance. The
constructions and demonstrations are Euclid's, but slightly modified.
footnotesize


PROP. XXX.-Theorem.To divide a given line  in "extreme and mean ratio."

Sol.-Divide  in , so that the rectangle 
may be equal to the square on 
[II. xi.] Then  is the point required.

1102f259

Dem.-Because the rectangle  is equal to the
square on  [xvii.]. Hence 
is cut in extreme and mean ratio in  [Def. ii.].

Exercises.


1. If the three sides of a right-angled triangle be in continued
proportion, the hypotenuse is divided in extreme and mean ratio
by the perpendicular from the right angle on the hypotenuse.

2. In the same case the greater segment of the hypotenuse is
equal to the least side of the triangle.

3. The square on the diameter of the circle described about the
triangle formed by the points , ,  (see fig. II. xi.), is equal to
six times the square on the line .
footnotesize

PROP. XXXI.-Theorem.If any similar rectilineal figure be similarly described
on the three sides of a right-angled triangle , the
figure on the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of those described
on the two other sides.

Dem.-Draw the perpendicular  [I. xii.]. Then
because  is a right-angled triangle, and  is
drawn from the right angle perpendicular to the hypotenuse;
 in the duplicate ratio of 
[viii. Cor. 4]. Again, because the figures described
on ,  are similar, they are in the duplicate ratio
of  [xx.]. Hence [V. xi.]  figure
described on  figure described on AC. In like
manner,  figure described on  figure
described on . Hence [V. xxiv.]  sum of 
and  figure described on the line  sum of
the figures described on the lines , ; but 
is equal to the sum of  and .
Therefore [V. a.] the figure described on the line  is equal to the sum of
the similar figures described on the lines  and .

1508f210

Or thus: Let us denote the sides by , , , and the
figures by , , ; then because the figures are
similar, we have [xx.]

*
&&  : &:: a^2 : c^2 

&therefore&
   &= a^2c^2. && 

&In like manner, &
    &= b^2c^2;
&&In 

&therefore &
   + 
&= a^2 + b^2c^2;  &&
but  [I. xlvii.]. Therefore ; that
is, the sum of the figures on the sides is equal to the figure
on the hypotenuse.

Exercise.


If semicircles be described on supplemental chords of a semicircle,
the sum of the areas of the two crescents thus formed is
equal to the area of the triangle whose sides are the supplemental
chords and the diameter.
footnotesize


PROP. XXXII.-Theorem.If two triangles  which have two sides of
one proportional to two sides of the other ,
and the contained angles  equal, be joined at
an angle , so as to have their homologous sides parallel,
the remaining sides are in the same right line.

1307f211

Dem.-Because the triangles ,  have the
angles  and  equal, and
the sides about these angles
proportional, viz., ,
they are equiangular
[vi.]; therefore the
angle  is equal to .
To each add , and we have the sum of the angles ,  equal to the
sum of  and ; but the sum of ,  is
[I. xxix.] two right angles; therefore the sum of 
and  is two right angles. Hence [I. xiv.] , 
are in the same right line.

PROP. XXXIII.-Theorem.In equal circles, angles  at the centres or
 at the circumferences have the same ratio to
one another as the arcs  on which they stand,
and so also have the sectors .

240f212

Dem.-1. Take any number of arcs ,  in the
first circle, each equal to . Join , , and in
the second circle take any number of arcs , , each
equal to . Join , . Then because the arcs
, ,  are all equal, the angles , , ,
are all equal [III. xxvii.]. Therefore the arc  and
the angle  are equimultiples of the arc  and
the angle . In like manner it may be proved
that the arc  and the angle  are equimultiples
of the arc  and the angle . Again, since the
circles are equal, it is evident that the angle 
is greater than, equal to, or less than the angle ,
according as the arc  is greater than, equal to, or
less than the arc . Now we have four magnitudes,
namely, the arc , the arc , the angle , and
the angle ; and we have taken equimultiples of the
first and third, namely, the arc , the angle ,
and other equimultiples of the second and fourth,
namely, the arc  and the angle , and we have
proved that, according as the multiple of the first is
greater than, equal to, or less than the multiple of the
second, the multiple of the third is greater than, equal
to, or less than the multiple of the fourth. Hence
[V. Def. v.]  the angle .

Again, since the angle  is half the angle 
[III. xx.], and  is half the angle ,
*
&&&&  BAC : EDF &:: BOC : EPF &&[V. xv.]; &&&&Hence 

&but &&&
      BOC : EPF &:: BC : EF.   &&  &&&&

&Hence &&&
      BAC : EDF &:: BC : EF   &&[V. xi.].  &&&&

2. The sector  sector .

Dem.-The same construction being made, since the
arc  is equal to , the angle  is equal to .
Hence the sectors ,  are congruent (see Observation,
Proposition xxix., Book III.); therefore they
are equal. In like manner the sectors ,  are
equal. Hence there are as many equal sectors as there
are equal arcs; therefore the arc  and the sector
 are equimultiples of the arc  and the sector
. In the same manner it may be proved that the
arc  and the sector  are equimultiples of the
arc  and the sector ; and it is evident, by
superposition, that if the arc  is greater than, equal
to, or less than the arc , the sector  is greater
than, equal to, or less than the sector . Hence
[V. Def. v.] the arc  sector  sector
.

The second part may be proved as follows:-


Sector  rectangle contained by the arc , and the
radius of the circle  [xx. Ex. 14] and sector  rectangle
contained by the arc  and the radius of the circle ;
and since the circles are equal, their radii are equal. Hence,
sector  sector  arc  arc .
footnotesize

Questions for Examination on Book VI.


1. What is the subject-matter of Book VI.? Ans. Application
of the theory of proportion.

2. What are similar rectilineal figures?

3. What do similar figures agree in?

4. How many conditions are necessary to define similar triangles?

5. How many to define similar rectilineal figures of more
than three sides?

6. When is a figure said to be given in species?

7. When in magnitude?

8. When in position?

9. What is a mean proportional between two lines?

10. Define two mean proportionals.

11. What is the altitude of a rectilineal figure?

12. If two triangles have equal altitudes, how do their areas
vary?

13. How do these areas vary if they have equal bases but unequal altitudes?

14. If both bases and altitudes differ, how do the areas vary?

15. When are two lines divided proportionally?

16. If in two lines divided proportionally a pair of homologous
points coincide with their point of intersection, what property
holds for the lines joining the other pairs of homologous
points?

17. Define reciprocal proportion.

18. If two triangles have equal areas, prove that their perpendiculars
are reciprocally proportional to the bases.

19. What is meant by figures inversely similar?

20. If two figures be inversely similar, how can they be
changed into figures directly similar?

21. Give an example of two triangles inversely similar. Ans.
If two lines passing through any point  outside a circle intersect
it in pairs of points , ; , , respectively, the triangles
, , are inversely similar.

22. What point is it round which a figure can be turned so as
to bring its sides into positions of parallelism with the sides of a
similar rectilineal figure. Ans. The centre of similitude of the
two figures.

23. How many figures similar to a given rectilineal figure of
sides can be described on a given line?

24. How many centres of similitude can two regular polygons
of  sides each have? Ans.  centres, which lie on a
circle.

25. What are homothetic figures?

26. How do the areas of similar rectilineal figures vary?

27. What proposition is xix. a special case of?

28. Define Philo's line.

29. How many centres of similitude have two circles?
footnotesize

Exercises on Book VI.


1. If in a fixed triangle we draw a variable parallel to the
base, the locus of the points of intersection of the diagonals of
the trapezium thus cut off from the triangle is the median that
bisects the base.

2. Find the locus of the point which divides in a given ratio
the several lines drawn from a given point to the circumference
of a given circle.

3. Two lines , , are given in position:  is divided in
 in the ratio , and parallels , , , are drawn in
any direction meeting  in the points , , ; prove




4. Three concurrent lines from the vertices of a triangle 
meet the opposite sides in , , ; prove




5. If a transversal meet the sides of a triangle  in the
points , , ; prove




6. If on a variable line , drawn from a fixed point  to any
point  in the circumference of a given circle, a point  be taken
such that the rectangle  is constant, the locus of  is a
circle.

7. If  be the middle point of the base  of a triangle ,
 the foot of the perpendicular,  the point where the bisector of
the angle  meets ,  the point of contact of the inscribed
circle with ; prove .

8. In the same case, if  be the point of contact with 
of the escribed circle, which touches the other sides produced,
.

9. If , , , ,  be the radii of the circumscribed, the inscribed,
and the escribed circles of a plane triangle, , , , 
the distances of the centre of the circumscribed circle from the
centres of the others, then , c.

10. In the same case, .

11. If , ,  denote the perpendiculars of a triangle, then
*

12. In a given triangle inscribe another of given form, and
having one of its angles at a given point in one of the sides of
the original triangle.

13. If a triangle of given form move so that its three sides
pass through three fixed points, the locus of any point in its
plane is a circle.

14. The angle  and the area of a triangle  are given in
magnitude: if the point  be fixed in position, and the point 
move along a fixed line or circle, the locus of the point  is a
circle.

15. One of the vertices of a triangle of given form remains
fixed; the locus of another is a right line or circle; find the
locus of the third.

16. Find the area of a triangle-(1) in terms of its medians;
(2) in terms of its perpendiculars.

17. If two circles touch externally, their common tangent is a
mean proportional between their diameters.

18. If there be given three parallel lines, and two fixed points
, ; then if the lines of connexion of  and  to any variable
point in one of the parallels intersect the other parallels in the
points  and ,  and , respectively,  and  pass each
through a fixed point.

19. If a system of circles pass through two fixed points, any
two secants passing through one of the points are cut proportionally
by the circles.

20. Find a point  in the plane of a triangle , such that
the diameters of the three circles, about the triangles , ,
, may be in the ratios of three given lines.

21.  is a cyclic quadrilateral: the lines , , and
the point , are given in position; find the locus of the point
which divides  in a given ratio.

22. ,  are two tangents to a circle;  is perpendicular
to , the diameter through ; prove that  bisects .

23. If three lines from the vertices of a triangle  to any
interior point  meet the opposite sides in the points , , ;
prove




24. If three concurrent lines , ,  be cut by two
transversals in the two systems of points , , ; , , ,
respectively: prove






25. The line joining the middle points of the diagonals of a
quadrilateral circumscribed to a circle-
0.3in0in

   [(1)] divides each pair of opposite sides into inversely proportional segments;
   [(2)] is divided by each pair of opposite lines into segments which, measured from the centre, are proportional to the sides;
   [(3)] is divided by both pairs of opposite sides into segments which, measured from either diagonal, have the same ratio to each other.

26. If ,  be the internal and external bisectors of the
angle  of the triangle , the three rectangles ,
,  are proportional to the squares of , ,
; and are-(1) in arithmetical progression if the difference of
the base angles be equal to a right angle; (2) in geometrical
progression if one base angle be right; (3) in harmonical
progression if the sum of the base angles be equal to a right angle.

27. If a variable circle touch two fixed circles, the chord of
contact passes through a fixed point on the line connecting the
centres of the fixed circles.

304f213

Dem.-Let ,  be the centres of the two fixed circles; 
the centre of the variable circle; ,  the points of contact. Let
 and  meet in , and cut the fixed circles again in the
points ,  respectively. Join , , . Then , 
meet in  [III. xi.]. Now, because the triangles , 
are isosceles, the angle . Hence  is
parallel to ; therefore ; that is, in a
given ratio. Hence  is a given point.

28. If  be the common tangent to the two circles, .

29. If  denote the radius of  and , , the radii of , ,
, the choice of sign depending
on the nature of the contacts. This follows from 28.

30. If four circles be tangential to a fifth, and if we denote by
 the common tangent to the first and second, c., then






31. The inscribed and escribed circles of any triangle are all
touched by its nine-points circle.

32. The four triangles which are determined by four points,
taken three by three, are such that their nine-points circles
have one common point.

33. If , , ,  denote the four sides, and ,  the diagonals
of a quadrilateral; prove that the sides of the triangle, formed by
joining the feet of the perpendiculars from any of its angular
points on the sides of the triangle formed by the three remaining
points, are proportional to the three rectangles , , .

34. Prove the converse of Ptolemy's theorem (see xvii., Ex. 13).

35. Describe a circle which shall-(1) pass through a given
point, and touch two given circles; (2) touch three given
circles.

36. If a variable circle touch two fixed circles, the tangent to
it from their centre of similitude, through which the chord of contact
passes (27), is of constant length.

37. If the lines ,  (see fig., Ex. 27) be produced, they
meet in a point on the circumference of , and the line  is
perpendicular to .

38. If ,  be two fixed points on two lines given in position,
and ,  two variable points, such that the ratio  is
constant, the locus of the point dividing  in a given ratio is a
right line.

39. If a line  divide proportionally two opposite sides of a
quadrilateral, and a line  the other sides, each of these is
divided by the other in the same ratio as the sides which determine
them.

40. In a given circle inscribe a triangle, such that the triangle
whose angular points are the feet of the perpendiculars from the
extremities of the base on the bisector of the vertical angle, and
the foot of the perpendicular from the vertical angle on the base,
may be a maximum.

41. In a circle, the point of intersection of the diagonals of any
inscribed quadrilateral coincides with the point of intersection of
the diagonals of the circumscribed quadrilateral, whose sides touch
the circle at the angular points of the inscribed quadrilateral.

42. Through two given points describe a circle whose common
chord with another given circle may be parallel to a given line,
or pass through a given point.

43. Being given the centre of a circle, describe it so as to cut
the legs of a given angle along a chord parallel to a given line.

44. If concurrent lines drawn from the angles of a polygon of
an odd number of sides divide the opposite sides each into two
segments, the product of one set of alternate segments is equal to
the product of the other set.

45. If a triangle be described about a circle, the lines from the
points of contact of its sides with the circle to the opposite angular
points are concurrent.

46. If a triangle be inscribed in a circle, the tangents to the
circle at its three angular points meet the three opposite sides at
three collinear points.

47. The external bisectors of the angles of a triangle meet the
opposite sides in three collinear points.

48. Describe a circle touching a given line at a given point,
and cutting a given circle at a given angle.

Def.-The centre of mean position of any number of points
, , , , c., is a point which may be found as follows:-Bisect
the line joining any two points , , in . Join  to a
third point ; divide  in , so that . Join  to a
fourth point , and divide  in , so that , and so
on. The last point found will be the centre of mean position of
the given points.

49. The centre of mean position of the angular points of a
regular polygon is the centre of figure of the polygon.

50. The sum of the perpendiculars let fall from any system of
points , , , , c., whose number is  on any line , is equal
to  times the perpendicular from the centre of mean position
on .

51. The sum of the squares of lines drawn from any system of
points , , , , c., to any point , exceeds the sum of the
squares of lines from the same points to their centre of mean
position, , by .

52. If a point be taken within a triangle, so as to be the centre
of mean position of the feet of the perpendiculars drawn from it
to the sides of the triangle, the sum of the squares of the perpendiculars
is a minimum.

53. Construct a quadrilateral, being given two opposite angles,
the diagonals, and the angle between the diagonals.

54. A circle rolls inside another of double its diameter; find
the locus of a fixed point in its circumference.

55. Two points, , , in the circumference of a given circle are
on the same side of a given diameter; find a point  in the circumference
at the other side of the given diameter, , such that
,  may cut  at equal distances from the centre.

56. If the sides of any polygon be cut by a transversal, the
product of one set of alternate segments is equal to the product
of the remaining set.

57. A transversal being drawn cutting the sides of a triangle,
the lines from the angles of the triangle to the middle points
of the segments of the transversal intercepted by those angles
meet the opposite sides in collinear points.

58. If lines be drawn from any point  to the angles of a
triangle, the perpendiculars at  to these lines meet the opposite
sides of the triangle in three collinear points.


59. Divide a given semicircle into two parts by a perpendicular
to the diameter, so that the radii of the circles inscribed in them
may have a given ratio.

60. From a point within a triangle perpendiculars are let fall
on the sides; find the locus of the point, when the sum of the
squares of the lines joining the feet of the perpendiculars is
given.

61. If a circle make given intercepts on two fixed lines, the
rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from its centre on the
bisectors of the angle formed by the lines is given.

62. If the base and the difference of the base angles of a
triangle be given, the rectangle contained by the perpendiculars
from the vertex on two lines through the middle point of the
base, parallel to the internal and external bisectors of the vertical
angle, is constant.

63. The rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from the
extremities of the base of a triangle, on the internal bisector of
the vertical angle, is equal to the rectangle contained by the
external bisector and the perpendicular from the middle of the
base on the internal bisector.

64. State and prove the corresponding theorem for perpendiculars
on the external bisector.

65. If ,  denote the radii of the circles inscribed in the
triangles into which a right-angled triangle is divided by the perpendicular
from the right angle on the hypotenuse; then, if  be
the hypotenuse, and  the semiperimeter, .

66. If , , ,  be four collinear points, find a point  in
the same line with them such that .

67. The four sides of a cyclic quadrilateral are given; construct
it.

68. Being given two circles, find the locus of a point such
that tangents from it to the circles may have a given ratio.

69. If four points , , ,  be collinear, find the locus of the
point  at which  and  subtend equal angles.

70. If a circle touch internally two sides, , , of a triangle
and its circumscribed circle, the distance from  to the point of
contact on either side is a fourth proportional to the semiperimeter,
and , .

71. State and prove the corresponding theorem for a circle
touching the circumscribed circle externally and two sides produced.

17028f214

72. Pascal's Theorem.-If the opposite sides of an irregular
hexagon  inscribed in a circle be produced till they
meet, the three points of intersection , ,  are collinear.

Dem.-Join . Describe a circle about the triangle ,
cutting the lines ,  produced, if necessary, in  and .
Join , , . Now,
the angles ,  are
each [III. xxi.] equal to
the angle . Hence they
are equal. Therefore  is
parallel to . Similarly,
 is parallel to , and
 to ; hence the triangles
,  are homothetic.
Hence the lines
joining corresponding vertices
are concurrent. Therefore
the points , ,  are
collinear.

73. If two sides of a triangle
circumscribed to a
given circle be given in
position, but the third side
variable, the circle described
about the triangle touches a
fixed circle.

74. If two sides of a triangle
be given in position,
and if the area be given in
magnitude, two points can be found, at each of which the base
subtends a constant angle.

75. If , , ,  denote the sides of a cyclic quadrilateral, and 
its semiperimeter, prove its area .

76. If three concurrent lines from the angles of a triangle 
meet the opposite side in the points , , , and the points
, ,  be joined, forming a second triangle ,




77. In the same case the diameter of the circle circumscribed
about the triangle  divided by the area of
.

78. If a quadrilateral be inscribed in one circle, and circumscribed
to another, the square of its area is equal to the product
of its four sides.

79. If on the sides ,  of a triangle  we take two
points , , and on their line of connexion , such that



prove the triangle .

80. If through the middle points of each of the two diagonals
of a quadrilateral we draw a parallel to the other, the lines drawn
from their points of intersection to the middle points of the sides
divide the quadrilateral into four equal parts.

81. ,  are perpendiculars to the diameter of a semicircle,
and two circles are described touching , , and the semicircle,
one internally and the other externally; the rectangle contained by
the perpendiculars from their centres on  is equal to .

82. If lines be drawn from any point in the circumference of a
circle to the angular points of any inscribed regular polygon of an
odd number of sides, the sums of the alternate lines are equal.

83. If at the extremities of a chord drawn through a given
point within a given circle tangents be drawn, the sum of the
reciprocals of the perpendiculars from the point upon the tangents
is constant.

84. If a cyclic quadrilateral be such that three of its sides pass
through three fixed collinear points, the fourth side passes through
a fourth fixed point, collinear with the three given ones.

85. If all the sides of a polygon be parallel to given lines, and
if the loci of all the angles but one be right lines, the locus of the
remaining angle is also a right line.

86. If the vertical angle and the bisector of the vertical angle
be given, the sum of the reciprocals of the containing sides is
constant.

87. If ,  denote the areas of two regular polygons of any
common number of sides, inscribed and circumscribed to a circle,
and ,  the areas of the corresponding polygons of double the
number of sides; prove  is a geometric mean between  and ,
and  a harmonic mean between
 and .

88. The difference of the areas of the triangles formed by joining
the centres of the circles described about the equilateral triangles
constructed-(1) outwards; (2) inwards-on the sides of
any triangle, is equal to the area of that triangle.

89. In the same case, the sum of the squares of the sides of
the two new triangles is equal to the sum of the squares of the
sides of the original triangle.

90. If ,  denote the radii of the circumscribed and inscribed
circles to a regular polygon of any number of sides, , , corresponding
radii to a regular polygon of the same area, and double
the number of sides; prove




91. If the altitude of a triangle be equal to its base, the sum
of the distances of the orthocentre from the base and from the
middle point of the base is equal to half the base.

92. In any triangle, the radius of the circumscribed circle is to
the radius of the circle which is the locus of the vertex, when
the base and the ratio of the sides are given, as the difference of
the squares of the sides is to four times the area.

93. Given the area of a parallelogram, one of its angles, and
the difference between its diagonals; construct the parallelogram.

94. If a variable circle touch two equal circles, one internally
and the other externally, and perpendiculars be let fall from its
centre on the transverse tangents to these circles, the rectangle of
the intercepts between the feet of these perpendiculars and the
intersection of the tangents is constant.

95. Given the base of a triangle, the vertical angle, and the
point in the base whose distance from the vertex is equal half
the sum of the sides; construct the triangle.

96. If the middle point of the base  of an isosceles triangle
 be the centre of a circle touching the equal sides, prove that
any variable tangent to the circle will cut the sides in points
, , such that the rectangle  will be constant.

97. Inscribe in a given circle a trapezium, the sum of whose
opposite parallel sides is given, and whose area is given.

98. Inscribe in a given circle a polygon all whose sides pass
through given points.

99. If two circles ,  be so related that a triangle may be
inscribed in  and circumscribed about , an infinite number of
such triangles can be constructed.

100. In the same case, the circle inscribed in the triangle
formed by joining the points of contact on  touches a given
circle.

101. And the circle described about the triangle formed by
drawing tangents to , at the angular points of the inscribed triangle,
touches a given circle.

102. Find a point, the sum of whose distances from three
given points may be a minimum.

103. A line drawn through the intersection of two tangents to
a circle is divided harmonically by the circle and the chord of
contact.

104. To construct a quadrilateral similar to a given one whose
four sides shall pass through four given points.

105. To construct a quadrilateral, similar to a given one,
whose four vertices shall lie on four given lines.

106. Given the base of a triangle, the difference of the base
angles, and the rectangle of the sides; construct the triangle.

107.  is a square, the side  is bisected in , and the
line  drawn, making the angle ; prove that 
divides the side  in the ratio of .

108. If any chord be drawn through a fixed point on a diameter
of a circle, and its extremities joined to either end of the
diameter, the joining lines cut off, on the tangent at the other
end, portions whose rectangle is constant.

109. If two circles touch, and through their point of contact
two secants be drawn at right angles to each other, cutting the
circles respectively in the points , ; , ; then 
is constant.

110. If two secants at right angles to each other, passing through
one of the points of intersection of two circles, cut the circles
again, and the line through their centres in the two systems of
points , , ; , ,  respectively, then .

111. Two circles described to touch an ordinate of a semicircle,
the semicircle itself, and the semicircles on the segments
of the diameter, are equal to one another.

112. If a chord of a given circle subtend a right angle at
a given point, the locus of the intersection of the tangents at
its extremities is a circle.

113. The rectangle contained by the segments of the base of a
triangle, made by the point of contact of the inscribed circle, is
equal to the rectangle contained by the perpendiculars from the
extremities of the base on the bisector of the vertical angle.


114. If  be the centre of the inscribed circle of the triangle
prove




115. State and prove the corresponding theorems for the
centres of the escribed circles.

116. Four points , , ,  are collinear; find a point  at
which the segments , ,  subtend equal angles.

117. The product of the bisectors of the three angles of a triangle
whose sides are , , , is





118. In the same case the product of the alternate segments of
the sides made by the bisectors of the angles is





119. If three of the six points in which a circle meets the sides
of any triangle be such, that the lines joining them to the opposite
vertices are concurrent, the same property is true of the three
remaining points.

120. If a triangle  be inscribed in another , prove



is equal twice the triangle  multiplied by the diameter of
the circle .

121. Construct a polygon of an odd number of sides, being
given that the sides taken in order are divided in given ratios
by fixed points.

122. If the external diagonal of a quadrilateral inscribed in a
given circle be a chord of another given circle, the locus of its
middle point is a circle.

123. If a chord of one circle be a tangent to another, the line
connecting the middle point of each arc which it cuts off on the
first, to its point of contact with the second, passes through a given
point.

124. From a point  in the plane of a given polygon perpendiculars
are let fall on its sides; if the area of the polygon
formed by joining the feet of the perpendiculars be given, the
locus of  is a circle.
footnotesize



BOOK XITheory of Planes, Coplanar Lines, and Solid Angles

i. When two or more lines are in one plane they are
said to be coplanar.

ii. The angle which one plane makes with another is
called a dihedral angle.

iii. A solid angle is that which is made by more than
two plane angles, in different planes, meeting in a
point.

iv. The point is called the vertex of the solid angle.

v. If a solid angle be composed of three plane angles
it is called a trihedral angle; if of four, a tetrahedral
angle; and if of more than four, a polyhedral angle.

PROP. I.-Theorem.One part  of a right line cannot be in a plane ,
and another part  not in it.

1506f215

Dem.-Since  is in the plane , it can be produced
in it [Bk. I. Post. ii.];
let it be produced to .
Then, if  be not in ,
let any other plane passing
through  be turned
round  until it passes
through the point . Now,
because the points ,  are in this second plane, the line
 [I., Def. vi.] is in it. Therefore the two right lines
,  lying in one plane have a common segment
, which is impossible. Therefore, c.

PROP. II.-Theorem.Two right lines  which intersect one another
in any point  are coplanar, and so also are any three
right lines  which form a triangle.1139f216

Dem.-Let any plane pass through , and be turned
round it until it passes through
. Then because the points
,  are in this plane, the right
line  is in it [I., Def. vi.].
For the same reason the line 
is in it. Therefore the lines ,
,  are coplanar; but 
and  are two of these lines.
Hence  and  are coplanar.

PROP. III.-Theorem.If two planes  cut one another, their common
section  is a right line.

1357f217

Dem.-If not from  to , draw in the plane  the
right line , and in the
plane  the right line .
Then the right lines ,
 enclose a space, which
[I., Axiom x.] is impossible.
Therefore the common section
 of the two planes must be
a right line.

PROP. IV.-Theorem.If a right line  be perpendicular to each of two intersecting
lines  , it will be perpendicular to any
line , which is both coplanar and concurrent with them.

158f218

Dem.-Through any point  in  draw a line 
intersecting , , and so as to be bisected in ; and
join any point  in  to , , . Then, because
 is perpendicular to the lines , , we have
*
6

&&  BF^2 + CF^2 &= BE^2 + CE^2 + 2EF^2.  &&and 

&Again &
    BF^2 + CF^2 &= 2BG^2 + 2GF^2 [II. x. Ex. 2],  &&

&and &
    BE^2 + CE^2 &= 2BG^2 + 2GE^2;  &&

&&  2BG^2 + 2GF^2 &= 2BG^2 + 2GE^2 + 2EF^2;  &&

&&  GF^2            &= GE^2 + EF^2.  &&

Hence the angle  is right, and  is perpendicular
to .

Def. vi.-A line such as , which is perpendicular
to a system of concurrent and coplanar lines, is said to be
perpendicular to the plane of these lines, and is called a
normal to it.

Cor. 1.-The normal is the least line that may be
drawn from a given point to a given plane; and of all
others that may be drawn to it, the lines of any
system making equal angles with the normal are equal
to each other.

Cor. 2.-A perpendicular to each of two intersecting
lines is normal to their plane.


PROP. V.-Theorem.If three concurrent lines  have a common
perpendicular , they are coplanar.10011f219

Dem.-For if possible let  be not coplanar with
, , and let the plane of ,
 intersect the plane of , 
in the line . Then [XI. iii.]
 is a right line; and, since it is
coplanar with , , which are
each perpendicular to , it is
[XI. iv.] perpendicular to .
Therefore the angle  is right;
and the angle  is right (hyp.).
Hence  is equal to ,
which is impossible [I., Axiom ix.].
Therefore the lines , ,  are coplanar.

PROP. VI.-Theorem.If two right lines  be normals to the same
plane , they shall be parallel to one another.

9311f220

Dem.-Let ,  meet the plane  at the points
, . Join , and in the plane
 draw  at right angles to ;
take any point  in . Join ,
, . Then because  is
normal to , the angle  is
right. Therefore ; because the
angle  is right. But , because the angle 
is right. Hence .
Therefore the angle  is right.
[I. xlviii]. And since  is normal to the plane ,
 is perpendicular to . Hence  is a common
perpendicular to the three concurrent lines , , .
Therefore these lines are coplanar [XI. v.]. But  is
coplanar with ,  [XI. ii.]. Therefore the lines
, ,  are coplanar; and since the angles ,
 are right, the line  is parallel to  [I. xxviii.].

Def. vii.-If from every point in a given line normals
be drawn to a given plane, the locus of their feet is called
the projection of the given line on the plane.

Exercises.


1. The projection of any line on a plane is a right line.

2. The projection on either of two intersecting planes of a
normal to the other plane is perpendicular to the line of intersection
of the planes.
footnotesize

PROP. VII.-Theorem.Two parallel lines  and any line  intersecting
them are coplanar.

1506f221

Dem.-If possible let the intersecting line be out of
the plane, as . And in
the plane, of the parallels
draw [I. Post. ii.] the
right line .  Then
we have two right lines
, , enclosing a
space, which [I. Axiom x.] is impossible. Hence the
two parallel right lines and the transversal are coplanar.


Or thus: Since the points ,  are in the plane of the parallels,
the line joining these points is in that plane [I. Def. vi].
footnotesize

PROP. VIII.-Theorem.If one  of two parallel right lines , be
normal to a plane , the other line  shall be normal
to the same plane.

10011f222

Dem.-Let ,  meet the plane  in the points
, . Join . Then the lines , ,  are coplanar.
Now in the plane , to
which  is normal, draw  at
right angles to . Take any
point  in , and join , ,
.

Then because  is normal to
the plane , it is perpendicular to
the line  in that plane [XI. Def. vi.].
Hence the angle 
is right; therefore  (because 
is right (const.))  (because  is right
(hyp.)). Therefore the angle  is right. Hence
 is at right angles both to  and . Therefore
[XI. iv.]  is perpendicular to , which is coplanar
and concurrent with  and . Again, since 
and  are parallel, the sum of the angles , 
is two right angles [I. xxix.]; but  is right (hyp.);
therefore  is right. Hence  is perpendicular to
the two lines , , and therefore [XI. iv.] it is normal
to their plane, that is, it is normal to .

PROP. IX-Theorem.Two right lines  which are each parallel to a
third line  are parallel to one another.

1337f223

Dem.-If the three lines be coplanar, the Proposition
is evidently the same
as I. xxx. If they are not
coplanar, from any point 
in  draw in the planes of
, ; , , respectively,
the lines ,  each
perpendicularto  [I. xi.].
Then because  is perpendicular to each of the lines
, , it is normal to their plane [XI. iv.]. And
because  is parallel to  (hyp.), and  is normal
to the plane ,  is normal to the plane 
[XI. viii.]. In like manner  is normal to the plane
. Hence, since  and  are normals to the same
plane, they are parallel to one another.

PROP. X.-Theorem.If two intersecting right lines  be respectively
parallel to two other intersecting right lines ,
the angle  between the former is equal to the angle
 between the latter.

12010f224

Dem.-If both pairs of lines be coplanar, the proposition
is the same as I. xxix.,
Ex. 2. If not, take any points
,  in the lines , , and
cut off , and 
[I. iii.]. Join , , ,
, . Then because  is
equal and parallel to , 
is equal and parallel to 
[I. xxxiii]. In like manner
 is equal and parallel to .
Hence [XI. ix.]  is equal
and parallel to . Hence [I. xxxiii.]  is equal to
. Therefore the triangles , , have the
three sides of one respectively equal to the three sides
of the other. Hence [I. viii.] the angle  is equal
to .

Def. viii.-Two planes which meet are perpendicular
to each other, when the right lines drawn in one of them
perpendicular to their common section are normals to the
other.

Def. ix.-When two planes which meet are not perpendicular
to each other, their inclination is the acute angle
contained by two right lines drawn from any point of their
common section at right angles to it-one in one plane, and
the other in the other.


Observation.-These definitions tacitly assume the result of
Props. iii. and x. of this book. On this account we have departed
from the usual custom of placing them at the beginning of the
book. We have altered the place of Definition vi. for a similar
reason.
footnotesize


PROP. XI.-Problem.To draw a normal to a given plane  from a given
point  not in it.

1509f225

Sol.-In the given plane  draw any line , and
from  draw  perpendicular to
 [I. xii.];
then if  be perpendicular
to the plane, the
thing required is done. If
not, from  draw  in
the plane  at right
angles to  [I. xi.], and
from  draw  [I. xii.]
perpendicular to .  is normal to the plane .

Dem.-Draw  parallel to . Then because 
is perpendicular both to  and , it is normal to
the plane of ,  [XI. iv.]; and since  is parallel
to , it is normal to the same plane [XI. viii.]. Hence
 is perpendicular to  [XI. Def. vi.], and  is
perpendicular to  (const.). Therefore  is normal
to the plane of  and -that is, to the plane .

PROP. XII.-Problem.To draw a normal to a given plane from a given point 
in the plane.15010f226

Sol.-From any point  not in the plane draw
[XI. xi.]  normal to it. If
this line pass through  it is the
normal required. If not, from
 draw  parallel to 
[I. xxxi.]. Then because 
and  are parallel, and  is
normal to the plane,  is also
normal to it [XI. viii.], and it
is drawn from the given point.
Hence it is the required normal.


PROP. XIII.-Theorem.From the same point  there can be but one normal
drawn to a given plane .1508f227

Dem.-1. Let  be in the given plane, and if possible
let ,  be both
normals to it, on the same
side. Now let the plane
of ,  cut the given
plane  in the line .
Then because  is a normal,
the angle  is
right. In like manner
 is right. Hence , which is impossible.

2. If the point be above the plane, there can be but
one normal; for, if there could be two, they would be
parallel [XI. vi.] to one another, which is absurd.
Therefore from the same point there can be drawn but one
normal to a given plane.

PROP. XIV.-Theorem.Planes  which have a common normal  are
parallel to each other.15516f228

Dem.-If the planes
be not parallel, they will
meet when produced. Let
them meet, their common
section being the line
, in which take any
point . Join , .
Then because  is normal
to the plane , it
is perpendicular to the
line , which it meets
in that plane [XI. Def. vi.].
Therefore the angle
 is right. In like
manner the angle 
is right. Hence the
plane triangle  has
two right angles, which is impossible. Therefore
the planes ,  cannot meet-that is, they are parallel.

Exercises.


1. The angle between two planes is equal to the angle between
two intersecting normals to these planes.

2. If a line be parallel to each of two planes, the sections
which any plane passing through it makes with them are parallel.

3. If a line be parallel to each of two intersecting planes, it is
parallel to their intersection.

4. If two right lines be parallel, they are parallel to the common
section of any two planes passing through them.

5. If the intersections of several planes be parallel, the normals
drawn to them from any point are coplanar.
footnotesize

PROP. XV.-Theorem.Two planes  are parallel, if two intersecting
lines  on one of them be respectively parallel to
two intersecting lines  on the other.

Dem.-From  draw  perpendicular to the plane
 [XI. xi.], and let it meet that plane in . Through
 draw  parallel to , and  to . Now,
since  is parallel to  (const.), and  to 
(hyp.),  is parallel to  [XI. ix.]. Hence the sum
of the angles ,  is two right angles [I. xxix];
but  is right (const.); therefore  is right. In
like manner  is right. Hence  is normal to
the plane  [XI. Def. vi.], and it is normal to 
(const.). Hence the planes ,  have a common
normal ; therefore they are parallel to one another.

200f229

PROP. XVI.-Theorem.If two parallel planes  be cut by a third plane
, their common sections  with it are
parallel.17214f230

Dem.-If the lines ,  are not parallel, they
must meet at some
finite distance. Let
them meet in . Now
since  is a point in
the line , and 
is in the plane ,
 is in the plane .
In like manner  is a
point in the plane .
Hence the planes ,
 meet in , which
is impossible, since
they are parallel.
Therefore the lines ,
 must be parallel.


Exercises.


1. Parallel planes intercept equal segments on parallel lines.

2. Parallel lines intersecting the same plane make equal angles
with it.

3. A right line intersecting parallel planes makes equal angles
with them.
footnotesize

PROP. XVII.-Theorem.If two parallel lines  be cut by three parallel
planes   in two triads of points ,
their segments between those points are proportional.

13015f231

Dem.-Join , , . Let  meet the plane
 in . Join , .
Then because the parallel
planes ,  are cut by
the plane  in the lines
, , these lines are
parallel [XI. xvi.]. Hence



In like manner,



Therefore [V. xi.]





PROP. XVIII.-Theorem.If a right line  be normal to a plane , any
plane  passing through it shall be perpendicular to
that plane.

1609f232

Dem.-Let  be the common section of the planes
, . From any point
 in  draw  in
the plane  parallel
to  [I. xxxi.]. Then
because  and  are
parallel, but  is normal,
to the plane ;
hence  is normal to it
[XI. viii.]. Now since
 is parallel to , the angles ,  are equal
to two right angles [I. xxix.]; but  is right
(hyp.); therefore  is right-that is,  is perpendicular
to . Hence every line in the plane ,
drawn perpendicular to the common section of the
planes , , is normal to the plane . Therefore
[XI. Def. viii.] the planes ,  are perpendicular to
each other.


PROP. XIX.-Theorem.If two intersecting planes  be each perpendicular
to a third plane , their common section 
shall be normal to that plane.11511f233

Dem.-If not, draw from  in the plane  the
line  perpendicular to ,
the common section of the planes
, ; and in the plane 
draw  perpendicular to the
common section  of the planes
, . Then because the
plane  is perpendicular to
, the line  in  is
normal to the plane  [XI. Def. viii.].
In like manner 
is normal to it. Therefore from
the point  there are two distinct normals to the
plane , which [XI. xiii.] is impossible. Hence
 must be normal to the plane .


Exercises.


1. If three planes have a common line of intersection, the normals
drawn to these planes from any point of that line are coplanar.

2. If two intersecting planes be respectively perpendicular to
two intersecting lines, the line of intersection of the former is
normal to the plane of the latter.

3. In the last case, show that the dihedral angle between the
planes is equal to the rectilineal angle between the normals.
footnotesize

PROP. XX.-Theorem.The sum of any two plane angles  of a
trihedral angle  is greater than the third .

1508f234

Dem.-If the third angle  be less than or equal
to either of the other
angles the proposition is
evident. If not, suppose it
greater: take any point
 in , and at the
point  in the plane 
make the angle 
equal  [I. xxiii.],
and cut off  equal . Through  draw , cutting
,  in the points , . Join , .

Then the triangles ,  have the two sides
,  in one equal respectively to the two sides
,  in the other, and the angle  equal to
; therefore the third side  is equal to .
But the sum of the sides ,  is greater than ;
hence  is greater than . Again, because the
triangles ,  have the sides ,  respectively
equal to the sides ,  in the other, but the
base  greater than ; therefore [I. xxv.] the angle
 is greater than , but the angle  is equal
to  (const.). Hence the sum of the angles ,
  is greater than the angle .

PROP. XXI.-Theorem.The sum of all the plane angles
   forming
any solid angle  is less than four right angles.12810f235

Dem.-Suppose for simplicity that the solid angle 
is contained by five plane angles , , ,
, ; and let the planes of these angles be cut
by another plane in the lines , , , , ;
then we have [XI. xx.],


Hence, adding, we get the sum
of the base angles of the five
triangles , , c.,
greater than the sum of the
interior angles of the pentagon
 -that is, greater than
six right angles. But the sum
of the base angles of the same
triangles, together with the
sum of the plane angles ,
, c., forming the solid
angle , is equal to twice as
many right angles as there are triangles , ,
c.-that is, equal to ten right angles. Hence the sum
of the angles forming the solid angle is less than four
right angles.


Observation.-This Prop. may not hold if the polygonal base
 contain re-entrant angles.
footnotesize

Exercises on Book XI.


1. Any face angle of a trihedral angle is less than the sum, but
greater than the difference, of the supplements of the other two
face angles.

2. A solid angle cannot be formed of equal plane angles which
are equal to the angles of a regular polygon of  sides, except in
the case of .

3. Through one of two non-coplanar lines draw a plane parallel
to the other.

4. Draw a common perpendicular to two non-coplanar lines,
and show that it is the shortest distance between them.

5. If two of the plane angles of a tetrahedral angle be equal,
the planes of these angles are equally inclined to the plane of the
third angle, and conversely. If two of the planes of a trihedral
angle be equally inclined to the third plane, the angles contained
in those planes are equal.

6. The three lines of intersection of three planes are either
parallel or concurrent.

7. If a trihedral angle  be formed by three right angles, and
, ,  be points along the edges, the orthocentre of the triangle
 is the foot of the normal from  on the plane .

8. If through the vertex  of a trihedral angle - any
line  be drawn interior to the angle, the sum of the rectilineal
angles , ,  is less than the sum, but greater than
half the sum, of the face angles of the trihedral.

9. If on the edges of a trihedral angle - three equal
lines , ,  be taken, each of these is greater than the
radius of the circle described about the triangle .

10. Given the three angles of a trihedral angle, find, by a plane
construction, the angles between the containing planes.

11. If any plane  cut the four sides of a Gauche quadrilateral
(a quadrilateral whose angular points are not coplanar)  in
four points, , , , , then the product of the four ratios






is plus unity, and conversely, if the product






the points , , ,  are coplanar.

12. If in the last exercise the intersecting plane be parallel to
any two sides of the quadrilateral, it cuts the two remaining sides
proportionally.

Def. x.-If at the vertex  of a trihedral angle - we
draw normals , ,  to the faces , , , respectively,
in such a manner that  will be on the same side
of the plane  as , c., the trihedral angle - is
called the supplementary of the trihedral angle -.

13. If - be the supplementary of -, prove that
- is the supplementary of -.

14. If two trihedral angles be supplementary, each dihedral
angle of one is the supplement of the corresponding face angle of
the other.

15. Through a given point draw a right line which will meet
two non-coplanar lines.

16. Draw a right line parallel to a given line, which will meet
two non-coplanar lines.

17. Being given an angle , the locus of all the points 
of space, such that the sum of the projections of the line  on
 and  may be constant, is a plane.

footnotesize

APPENDIXPrism, Pyramid, Cylinder, Sphere, and Cone

i. A polyhedron is a solid figure contained by plane
figures: if it be contained by four plane figures it is
called a tetrahedron; by six, a hexahedron; by eight, an
octahedron; by twelve, a dodecahedron; and if by
twenty, an icosahedron.

ii. If the plane faces of a polyhedron be equal and
similar rectilineal figures, it is called a regular polyhedron.

iii. A pyramid is a polyhedron of which all the faces
but one meet in a point. This point is called the
vertex; and the opposite face, the base.

iv. A prism is a polyhedron having a pair of parallel
faces which are equal and similar rectilineal figures, and
are called its ends. The others, called its side faces, are
parallelograms.

v. A prism whose ends are perpendicular to its sides
is called a right prism; any other is called an oblique
prism.

vi. The altitude of a pyramid is the length of the
perpendicular drawn from its vertex to its base; and
the altitude of a prism is the perpendicular distance
between its ends.

vii. A parallelopiped is a prism whose bases are
parallelograms. A parallelopiped is evidently a hexahedron.


viii. A cube is a rectangular parallelopiped, all whose
sides are squares.

ix. A cylinder is a solid figure formed by the revolution
of a rectangle about one of its sides, which remains
fixed, and which is called its axis. The circles which
terminate a cylinder are called its bases or ends.

x. A cone is the solid figure described by the revolution
of a right-angled triangle about one of the legs,
which remains fixed, and which is called the axis. The
other leg describes the base, which is a circle.

xi. A sphere is the solid described by the revolution
of a semicircle about a diameter, which remains fixed.
The centre of the sphere is the centre of the generating
semicircle. Any line passing through the centre of
a sphere and terminated both ways by the surface is
called a diameter.

PROP. I.-Theorem.Right prisms -- which
have bases  that are equal and similar,
and which have equal altitudes, are equal.

17512f236

Dem.-Apply the bases to each other; then, since
they are equal and
similar figures, they
will coincide-that
is, the point  with
,  with , c.
And since  is
equal to , and
each is normal to
its respective base,
the: point  will
coincide with . In
the same manner the
points , , ,  will coincide respectively with the
points , , , . Hence the prisms are equal in every
respect.


Cor. 1.-Right prisms which have equal bases 
and equal altitudes are equal in volume.

213f237

Dem.-Since the bases are equal, but not similar, we
can suppose one of them, , divided into parts , , ,
and re-arranged so as to make them coincide with the
other [I. xxxv., note]; and since the prism on  can
be subdivided in the same manner by planes perpendicular
to the base, the proposition is evident.

Cor. 2.-The volumes of right prisms  having
equal bases are proportional to their altitudes.

For, if the altitudes be in the ratio of ,  can
be divided into  prisms of equal altitudes by planes
parallel to the base; then these  prisms will be all
equal. In like manner,  can be divided into  equal
prisms. Hence .

Cor. 3.-In right prisms of equal altitudes the
volumes are to one another as the areas of their bases.
This may be proved by dividing the bases into parts
so that the subdivisions will be equal, and then the
volumes proportional to the number of subdivisions in
their respective bases, that is, to their areas.

Cor. 4.-The volume of a rectangular parallelopiped
is measured by the continued product of its three dimensions.

PROP. II.-Theorem.Parallelopipeds --, having
a common base  and equal altitudes, are equal.

250f238

. Let the edges ,  be in one right line; then
,  must be in one right line. Now ,
because each equal ; therefore ; therefore
the prisms -, and -, have their
triangular bases ,  identically equal, and
they have equal altitudes; hence they are equal; and
supposing them taken away from the entire solid, the
remaining parallelopipeds -, -
are equal.

280f239

. Let the edges ,  be in different lines;
then produce ,  to meet the lines  and 
produced in the points , , , . Then by  the
parallelopipeds -, - are each
equal to the parallelopiped -. Hence they
an equal to one another.

Cor.-The volume of any parallelopiped is equal to
the product of its base and altitude.


PROP. III.-Theorem.A diagonal plane of a parallelopiped divides it into two
prisms of equal volume.

. When the parallelopiped is rectangular the proposition
is evident.

. When it is any parallelopiped, -,
the diagonal plane bisects it.

11817f240

Dem.-Through the vertices ,  let planes be
drawn perpendicular to the edges
and cutting them in the points
, , ; , , , respectively.
Then [I. xxxiv.] we have , because each is equal to
. Hence . In like
manner . Hence the
pyramid - agrees in
everything but position with
-; hence it is equal to
it in volume. To each add the
solid -, and we have
the prism - equal to
the prism -. In like
manner --;
but () the prism --. Hence --.
Therefore the diagonal plane bisects the parallelopiped.

Cor. 1.-The volume of a triangular prism is equal
to the product of its base and altitude; because it is
half of a parallelopiped, which has a double base and
equal altitude.

Cor. 2.-The volume of any prism is equal to the
product of its base and altitude; because it can be
divided into triangular prisms.


PROP. IV.-Theorem.If a pyramid - be cut by any plane 
parallel to the base, the section is similar to the base.

11014f241

Dem.-Because the plane  cuts the parallel
planes , , the sections
,  are parallel [XI. xvi.]
In like manner ,  are parallel.
Hence the angle 
[XI. x.]. In like manner the
remaining angles of the polygon
 are equal to the corresponding
angles of .
Again, because  is parallel to
, the triangles ,  are
equiangular.

*
&Hence &
  AB &: BO:: ab: bO. [VI. iv.]  &&

&In like manner &
  BO &: BC:: bO: bc;  && 

&therefore &
  AB &: BC:: ab: bc. [Ex aequali.]  &&

&In like manner &
  BC &: CD:: bc: cd, c.  &&

Therefore the polygons ,  are equiangular,
and have the sides about their equal angles proportional.
Hence they are similar.

Cor. 1.-The edges and the altitude of the pyramid
are similarly divided by the parallel plane.

Cor. 2.-The areas of parallel sections are in the
duplicate ratio of the distances of their planes from the
vertex.

Cor. 3.-In any two pyramids, sections parallel to
their bases, which divide their altitudes in the same
ratio, are proportional to their bases.


PROP. V.-Theorem.Pyramids --, having equal altitudes
 and bases  of equal areas, have equal
volumes.

298f242

Dem.-If they be not equal in volume, let  be
the base of the greater; and let  be the altitude of a
prism, with an equal base, and whose volume is equal
to their difference; then let the equal altitudes , 
be divided into such a number of equal parts, by planes
parallel to the bases of the pyramids, that each part
shall be less than . Then [iv. Cor. 3] the sections
made by these planes will be equal each to each. Now
let prisms be constructed on these sections as bases and
with the equal parts of the altitudes of the pyramids as
altitudes, and let the prisms in - be constructed
below the sections, and in -, above. Then it is
evident that the sum of the prisms in - is
less than that pyramid, and the sum of those on the
sections of - greater than -. Therefore the
difference between the pyramids is less than the difference
between the sums of the prisms, that is, less than
the lower prism in the pyramid -; but the altitude
of this prism is less than  (const.). Hence the difference
between the pyramids is less than the prism
whose base is equal to one of the equal bases, and
whose altitude is equal to , and the difference is
equal to this prism (hyp.), which is impossible. Therefore
the volumes of the pyramids are equal.

11313f243

Cor. 1.-The volume of a triangular pyramid -
is one third the volume of the prism
-, having the same base
and altitude.

For, draw the plane , then
the pyramids -, -
are equal, having equal bases ,
, and a common altitude; and
the pyramids -, - are
equal, having a common base and
equal altitudes. Hence the pyramid
- is one of three
equal pyramids into which the
prism is divided. Therefore it is
one third of the prism.

Cor. 2.-The volume of every pyramid is one-third of
the volume of a prism having an equal base and altitude.

Because it may be divided into triangular pyramids
by planes through the vertex and the diagonals of the
base.


PROP. VI.-Theorem.The volume of a cylinder is equal to the product of the
area of its base by its altitude.

13811f244

Dem.-Let  be the centre of its circular base; and
take the angle  indefinitely
small, so that the arc
 may be regarded as a
right line. Then planes perpendicular
to the base, and
cutting it in the lines ,
, will be faces of a triangular
prism, whose base
will be the triangle ,
and whose altitude will be
the altitude of the cylinder.
The volume of this prism will be equal to the area of
the triangle  by the height of the cylinder. Hence,
dividing the circle into elementary triangles, the cylinder
will be equal to the sum of all the prisms, and
therefore its volume will be equal to the area of the base
multiplied by the altitude.

Cor. 1.-If  be the radius, and  the height of the
cylinder,




1358f245

Cor. 2.-If  be a rectangle;  a line in its plane
parallel to the side ;  the
middle point of the rectangle;
the volume of the solid described
by the revolution of
 round  is equal to
the area of  multiplied
by the circumference of the
circle described by .

Dem.-Produce the lines ,  to meet  in the
points , . Then when the rectangle revolves round
, the rectangles ,  will describe cylinders
whose bases will be circles having ,  as radii,
and whose common altitude will be . Hence the
difference between the volumes of these cylinders will
be equal to the differences between the areas of the bases
multiplied by , that is .
Therefore the volume described by 
*
&&          &= .AB.(AE + DE)(AE - DE);  &&but 

&but &
    AE + DE &= 2 OG, and AE-DE = AD.  &&
Hence volume described by the rectangle 

.25.

.25 rectangle  multiplied by the
circumference of the circle described by its middle
point .


Observation.-This Cor. is a simple case of Guldinus's celebrated
theorem. By its assistance we give in the two following
corollaries original methods of finding the volumes of the cone and
sphere, and it may be applied with equal facility to the solution
of several other problems which are usually done by the Integral
Calculus.
footnotesize

Cor. 3.-The volume of a cone is one-third the volume
of a cylinder having the same base and altitude.

1609f246

Dem.-Let  be a rectangle whose diagonal is
. The triangle  will describe a cone, and the
rectangle a cylinder by revolving round . Take two
points ,  infinitely
near each other in ,
and form two rectangles,
, , by drawing
lines parallel to , .
Now if ,  be the
middle points of these
rectangles, it is evident
that, when the whole
figure revolves round , the circumference of the
circle described by  will ultimately be twice the circumference
of the circle described by ; and since the
parallelogram  is equal to  [I. xliii.], the solid
described by  (Cor. 1) will be equal to twice the
solid described by . Hence, if  be divided into
an indefinite number of equal parts, and rectangles
corresponding to ,  be inscribed in the triangles
, , the sum of the solids described by the
rectangles in the triangle  is equal to twice the
sum of the solids described by the rectangles in the
triangle -that is, the difference between the
cylinder and cone is equal to twice the cone. Hence
the cylinder is equal to three times the cone.


Or thus: We may regard the cone and the cylinder as limiting
cases of a pyramid and prism having the same base and altitude;
and since (v. Cor. 2) the volume of a pyramid is one-third of the
volume of a prism, having the same base and altitude, the volume
of the cone is one-third of the volume of the cylinder.
footnotesize

Cor. 4.-If  be the radius of the base of a cone, and
 its height,




Cor. 5.-The volume of a sphere is two-thirds of the
volume of a circumscribed cylinder.

200f247

Dem.-Let  be the diameter of the semicircle
which describes the sphere;  the rectangle which
describes the cylinder. Take two points ,  indefinitely
near each other in the semicircle. Join , which
will be a tangent, and produce it to meet the diameter
 perpendicular to  in . Let  be the centre.
Join ; draw , ,  parallel to ; and ,
 parallel to ; and produce to meet  in  and
; and let ,  be the middle points of the rectangles
, .

Now the rectangle , because each
is equal to . Hence , or
. Now, denoting the radii of
the circles described by the points ,  by ,  respectively,
we have ultimately  and .
Hence ; but  rectangle
 rectangle  [I. xliii.] ;
*
Hence the solid described by  equal twice the solid
described by . Therefore we infer, as in the last
Cor., that the whole volume of the sphere is equal to
twice the difference between the cylinder and sphere.
Therefore the sphere is two-thirds of the cylinder.

Cor. 6.-If  be the radius of a sphere,




PROP. VII.-Theorem.The surface of a sphere is equal to the convex surface of
the circumscribed cylinder.

190f248

Dem.-Let  be the diameter of the semicircle
which describes the sphere. Take two points, , ,
indefinitely near each other in the semicircle. Join
, and produce to meet the tangent  parallel to
 in . Draw ,  parallel to . Produce 
to meet  in . Let  be the centre. Join .

*
&Now we have &             FE : KI :: EN :& IN [VI. ii.];  &&

&but &       EN : IN ::& OE : EG,  &&but 
because the triangles  and  are similar.
*
&Hence &  FE : KI ::& OE : EG;  &&Hence 

&but &          OE =& IG.  &&
Hence ; and  circumference
of circle described by the point  circumference
of circle described by the point . Hence the rectangle
contained by , and circumference of circle described
by  is equal to the rectangle contained by , and circumference
of circle described by -that is, the portion
of the spherical surface described by  is equal to the
portion of the cylindrical surface described by .
Hence it is evident, if planes be drawn perpendicular
to the diameter -that the portions of cylindrical and
spherical surface between any two of them are equal.
Hence the whole spherical surface is equal to the cylindrical
surface described by .



Or thus: Conceive the whole surface of the sphere divided into
an indefinitely great number of equal parts, then it is evident
that each of these may be regarded as the base of a pyramid
having the centre of the sphere as a common vertex. Therefore
the volume of the sphere is equal to the whole area of the surface
multiplied by one-third of the radius. Hence if  denote the
surface, we have*
&&  S r3 &= 4r^33 [vi., Cor. 6];  &&therefore 

&therefore &  S &= 4r^2.  &&
That is, the area of the surface of a sphere is equal four times
the area of one of its great circles.

Exercises.


1. The convex surface of a cone is equal to half the rectangle
contained by the circumference of the base and the slant height.

2. The convex surface of a right cylinder is equal to the rectangle
contained by the circumference of the base and the altitude.

3. If  be a point in the base  of a triangular pyramid
-, and if parallels to the edges , , , through ,
meet the faces in the points , , , the sum of the ratios






4. The volume of the frustum of a cone, made by a plane
parallel to the base, is equal to the sum of the three cones whose
bases are the two ends of the frustum, and the circle whose
diameter is a mean proportional between the end diameters, and
whose common altitude is equal to one-third of the altitude of the
frustum.

5. If a point  be joined to the angular points , , ,  of a
tetrahedron, and the joining lines, produced if necessary, meet the
opposite faces in , , , , the sum of the ratios







6. The surface of a sphere is equal to the rectangle by its
diameter, and the circumference of a great circle.

7. The surface of a sphere is two thirds of the whole surface
of its circumscribed cylinder.

8. If the four diagonals of a quadrangular prism be concurrent,
it is a parallelopiped.

9. If the slant height of a right cone be equal to the diameter
of its base, its total surface is to the surface of the inscribed sphere
as .

10. The middle points of two pairs of opposite edges of a
triangular pyramid are coplanar, and form a parallelogram.

11. If the four perpendiculars from the vertices on the opposite
faces of a pyramid  be concurrent, then




12. Every section of a sphere by a plane is a circle.

13. The locus of the centres of parallel sections is a diameter of
the sphere.

14. If any number of lines in space pass through a fixed point,
the feet of the perpendiculars on them from another fixed point
are homospheric.

15. Extend the property of Ex. 4 to the pyramid.

16. The volume of the ring described by a circle which revolves
round a line in its plane is equal to the area of the circle, multiplied
by the circumference of the circle described by its centre.

17. Any plane bisecting two opposite edges of a tetrahedron
bisects its volume.

18. Planes which bisect the dihedral angles of a tetrahedron
meet in a point.

19. Planes which bisect perpendicularly the edges of a
tetrahedron meet in a point.

20. The volumes of two triangular pyramids, having a common
solid angle, are proportional to the rectangles contained by the
edges terminating in that angle.

21. A plane bisecting a dihedral angle of a tetrahedron divides
the opposite edge into portions proportional to the areas containing
that edge.

22. The volume of a sphere: the volume of the circumscribed
cube as .

23. If  be the height, and  the radius of a segment of a
sphere, its volume is .

24. If  be the perpendicular distance between two parallel
planes, which cut a sphere in sections whose radii are , , the
volume of the frustum is .

25. If  be the distance of a point  from the centre of a sphere
whose radius is , the sum of the squares of the six segments at
three rectangular chords passing through  is .

26. The volume of a sphere  the volume of an inscribed cube
as .

27. If - be a tetrahedron whose angles , ,
 are right, the square of the area of the triangle  is equal
to the sum of the squares of the three other triangular faces.

28. In the same case, if  be the perpendicular from  on the
face ,
*

29. If  be the height of an aeronaut, and  the radius of the
earth, the extent of surface visible .

30. If the four sides of a gauche quadrilateral touch a sphere,
the points of contact are concyclic.
footnotesize

tocNOTES.

NOTES.

[1ex]1cm 
NOTE A.

MODERN THEORY OF PARALLEL LINES.


In every plane there is one special line called the line at infinity.
The point where any other line in the plane cuts the line at infinity
is called the point at infinity in that line. All other points in the
line are called finite points. Two lines in the plane which meet
the line at infinity in the same point are said to have the same
direction, and two lines which meet it in different points to have
different directions. Two lines which have the same direction
cannot meet in any finite point [I. Axiom x.], and are parallel.
Two lines which have different directions must intersect in some
finite point, since, if produced, they meet the line at infinity in
different points. This is a fundamental conception in Geometry,
it is self-evident, and may be assumed as an Axiom (see Observations
on the Axioms, Book I.). Hence we may infer the following
general proposition:-"Any two lines in the same plane must
meet in some point in that plane; that is- at infinity, when the
lines have the same direction;  in some finite point, when they
have different directions."-See Poncelet, Proprietes Projectives,
page 52.


[1ex]3cm

NOTE B.

legendre's and hamilton's proofs of euclid, I. xxxii.


The discovery of the Proposition that "the sum of the three
angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles" is attributed to
Pythagoras. Until modern times no proof of it, independent of
the theory of parallels, was known. We shall give here two
demonstrations, each independent of that theory. These are due
to two of the greatest mathematicians of modern times-one, the
founder of the Theory of Elliptic Functions; the other, the discoverer
of the Calculus of Quaternions.

268f260

Legendre's Proof.-Let  be a triangle, of which the
side  is the greatest. Bisect  in . Join . Then  is
less than  [I. xix. Ex. 5]. Now, construct a new triangle
, having the side , and . Again, bisect
 in , and form another triangle , having ,
and , c. (1) The sum of the angles of the triangle  the sum of the angles of  [I. xvi. Cor. 1]  the sum of the
angles of  the sum of the angles of , c. (2) The
angle  is less than half ; the angle  is less than
half , and so on; hence the angle  will ultimately
become infinitely small. (3) The sum of the base angles of any
triangle of the series is equal to the angle of the preceding triangle
(see Dem. I. xvi.). Hence, if the annexed diagram
represent the triangle ,
the sum of the base angles  and  is
278f261
equal to the angle ; and when  is indefinitely large, this
angle is an infinitesimal; hence the point  will ultimately be
in the line , and the angle  will become a straight
angle [I. Def. x.], that is, it is equal to two right angles; but the
sum of the angles of  is equal to the sum of the
angles . Hence the sum of the three angles of  is equal
to two right angles.

215f249

Hamilton's Quaternion Proof.-Let  be the triangle.
Produce  to , and make  equal to . Produce
 to , and make  equal to ; finally, produce  to
, and make  equal to . Denote the exterior angles thus
formed by , , . Now let the leg  of the angle 
be turned round the point  through the angle ; then the point
 will coincide with . Again, let the leg  of the angle 
be turned round the point  through the angle , until  coincides
with ; then the point  will coincide with . Lastly,
let  be turned round , through the angle , until  coincides
with , and the point  with . Now, it is evident that
by these rotations the point  has been brought successively into
the positions , , ; hence, by a motion of mere translation
along the line , the line  can be brought into its former
position. Therefore it follows, since rotation is independent of
translation, that the amount of the three rotations is equal to one
complete revolution round the point ; therefore  four right angles;
but

*
   && A + A' + B + B' + C + C' &= six right angles [I. xiii.]; && 

&hence
    & A + B + C &= two right angles. && hence. 

Observation.-The foregoing demonstration is the most
elementary that was ever given of this celebrated Proposition.
I have reduced it to its simplest form, and without making
any use of the language of Quaternions. The same method of
proof will establish the more general Proposition, that the sum
of the external angles of any convex rectilineal figure is equal
to four right angles.


Mr. Abbott, f.t.c.d., has informed me that this demonstration
was first given by Playfair in 1826, so that Hamilton was anticipated.
It has been objected to on the ground that, applied
verbatim to a spherical triangle, it would lead to the conclusion
that the sum of the angles is two right angles, which being
wrong, proves that the method is not valid. A slight consideration
will show that the cases are different. In the proof given
in the text there are three motions of rotation, in each of which
a point describes an arc of a circle, followed by a motion of
translation, in which the same point describes a right line, and
returns to its original position. On the surface of a sphere we
should have, corresponding to these, three motions of rotation,
in each of which the point would describe an arc of a circle,
followed by a motion of rotation about the centre of the sphere,
in which the point should describe an arc of a great circle to
return to its original position. Hence, the proof for a plane
triangle cannot be applied to a spherical triangle.



[1ex]3cm

NOTE C.

to inscribe a regular polygon of seventeen sides in a circle.


Analysis.-Let  be one of the angular points,  the diameter,
, ,   the vertices at one side of . Produce
 to , and  to , making , and .
Again, cut off , and . Lastly, cut off
, and . Then we have [IV. Ex. 40],

*
&&  _1_4 = R(_3 + _5) &= R.OM,  

&&  _2_8 = R(_6 - _7) &= R.ON;  

&but &
  _1_2_4_8 = &R^4  & [IV. Ex. 34]; 

&therefore &
                     OM.ON = &R^2  & *(1).

&In like manner, &
  OP.OQ = &R^2  &  *(2).

200f250

*
&Again,
  & OM.ON & = (_3+_5)(_6-_7)  

&& & = _3_6 + _5_6 - _3_7 - _5_7  

&& & = R(_3-_8) + R(_1-_6) - R(_2-_7) - R(_2-_5) [IV. Ex. 40].  

&& & = R(OM - ON - OP + OQ) = R(MR - PS):  

&& & MR - PS = R. 

&Again, &  MR.PS &= (OM - ON)(OP - OQ)  

&&  &= (_3+_5-_6+_7)(_2+_8-_1+_4);
and performing the multiplication and substituting, we get



Hence, the rectangle and the difference of the lines  and 
being given, each is given; hence  is given; but ; therefore  is given; and we have proved that
the rectangle ; therefore  and  are each
given. In like manner,  and  are each given.

Again,




Hence, since  and  are each given,  and  are each given;
therefore we can draw these chords, and we have the arc 
between their extremities given; that is, the seventeenth part of
the circumference of a circle. Hence the problem is solved.


The foregoing analysis is due to Ampere: see Catalan, Theoremes
et Problemes de Geometrie Elementaire. We have abridged
and simplified Ampere's solution.


[.5ex]3cm

NOTE D.

to find two mean proportionals between two given lines.


The problem to find two mean proportionals is one of the most
celebrated in Geometry on account of the importance which the
ancients attached to it. It cannot be solved by the line and
circle, but is very easy by Conic Sections. The following is a
mechanical construction by the Ruler and Compass.

Sol.-Let the extremes ,  be placed at right angles to
each other; complete the rectangle , and describe a circle
about it. Produce , , and let a graduated ruler be made
to revolve round the point , and so adjusted that  shall be
equal to ; then ,  are two mean proportionals between
, .

178f251

Dem.-Since  is equal to , the rectangle . Therefore  ; hence ; and by similar triangles, , and
. Hence ; and . Therefore , , ,  are continual proportions.
Hence [VI. Def. iv.] ,  are two mean proportionals
between  and .

The foregoing elegant construction is due to the ancient
Geometer Philo of Byzantium. If we join  it will be
perpendicular to . The line  is called Philo's Line; it
possesses the remarkable property of being the minimum line
through the point  between the fixed lines , .

Newton's Construction.-Let  and  be the two given
lines of which  is the greater. Bisect  in . With  as
centre and  as radius, describe a circle, and in it place the
chord  equal to the second line . Join , and draw by
trial through  a line meeting ,  produced in the points
, , so that the intercept  will be equal to the radius of the
circle.  and  are the mean proportionals required.

190f252

Dem.-Join . Since the line  cuts the sides of the
, we have
*
&&  AB.CD.EF &= CB.DE.FA; but EF = CB;  &&

&therefore &
therefore  AB.CD &= DE.FA, or CDDE = FAAB. therefore  &&
Again, since the  is isosceles, we have
*
Hence ,Hence 

or ,or 

therefore  , and we have . therefore 

Hence , , ,  are in continued proportion. Hence 


[.5ex]3cm

NOTE E.

on philo's line.


I am indebted to Professor Galbraith for the following proof
of the minimum property of Philo's Line. It is due to the late
Professor MacCullagh:-Let ,  be two given lines,  a
fixed point,  a perpendicular on ; it is required to prove,
if  is equal to , that  is a minimum.

Dem.-Through  draw  parallel to ; make ;
produce  until . Through the points ,  draw
,  each parallel to , and through  draw  parallel
to . It is easy to see from the figure that the parallelogram
 is equal to the parallelogram , and is therefore given.
Through  draw  perpendicular to . Now, since ,
 is equal to ; therefore . Again, since ,  is equal to ; therefore . Hence 
is the maximum parallelogram in the triangle .

185f253

Again, if any other line  be drawn through , and produced
to , so that , the point  must fall outside ,
because the parallelogram , corresponding to , will be
equal to , and therefore equal to . Hence the line 
is greater than , or  is greater than . Hence  is a
minimum.


[.5ex]3cm

NOTE F.

on the trisection of an angle.

The following mechanical method of trisecting an angle occurred
to me several years ago. Apart from the interest belonging
to the Problem, it is valuable to the student as a geometrical
exercise:-

To trisect a given angle .

204f254

Sol.-Erect  perpendicular to ; bisect the angle 
by , and make the angle  equal half a right angle; it is
evident that  will fall between  and . Then, if we use a
jointed ruler-that is two equal rulers connected by a pivot-and
make  equal to the length of one of these rulers, and, with 
as centre and  as radius, describe the circle , cutting
 in : at  draw the tangent , cutting  in .

Then, since  is half a right angle, and  is right,  is
half a right angle; therefore  is equal to ; but  equal ;
therefore -equal length of one of the two equal rulers.
Hence, if the rulers be opened out at right angles, and placed
so that the pivot will be at , and one extremity at , the other
extremity at ; it is evident that the point  will be between
the two rulers; then, while the extremity at  remains fixed, let
the other be made to traverse the line , until the edge of the
second ruler passes through : it is plain that the pivot moves
along the circumference of the circle. Let , , be the positions
of the rulers when this happens; draw the line ; the
angle  is one-third of .

Dem.-Produce  to . Join . Erect  at right
angles to . Then, because , the angle ,
and the angle  (const.). Hence the angle  [I. xxxii.], and the right angles ,  are equal;
therefore the angle  is equal to ; that is [III. xxxii.],
equal to , or to half the angle . Hence  is one-third
of .



[.5ex]3cm

NOTE G.

on the quadrature of the circle.

Modern mathematicians denote the ratio of the circumference
of a circle to its diameter by the symbol . Hence, if  denote
the radius, the circumference will be ; and, since the area of
a circle [VI. xx. Ex. 15] is equal to half the rectangle contained
by the circumference and the radius, the area will be . Hence,
if the area be known, the value of  will be known; and, conversely,
if the value of  be known, the area is known. On this
account the determination of the value of  is called "the problem
of the quadrature of the circle," and is one of the most celebrated
in Mathematics. It is now known that the value of  is incommensurable;
that is, that it cannot be expressed as the ratio of
any two whole numbers, and therefore that it can be found only
approximately; but the approximation can be carried as far as we
please, just as in extracting the square root we may proceed to as
many decimal places as may be required. The simplest approximate
value of  was found by Archimedes, namely, . This
value is tolerably exact, and is the one used in ordinary calculations,
except where great accuracy is required. The next to
this in ascending order, viz. , found by Vieta, is correct
to six places of decimals. It differs very little from the ratio
, given in our elementary books.

Several expeditious methods, depending on the higher mathematics,
are known for calculating the value of . The following
is an outline of a very simple elementary method for determining
this important constant. It depends on a theorem which is at
once inferred from VI., Ex. 87, namely "If ,  denote the reciprocals
of the areas of any two polygons of the same number of sides
inscribed and circumscribed to a circle; ,  the corresponding quantities
for polygons of twice the number;  is the geometric mean
between 
and , and  the arithmetic mean between  and ."
Hence, if  and  be known, we can, by the processes of finding
arithmetic and geometric means, find  and . In like manner,
from ,  we can find ,  related to , ; as ,  are to
, . Therefore, proceeding in this manner until we arrive at
values ,  that will agree in as many decimal places as
there are in the degree of accuracy we wish to attain; and since
the area of a circle is intermediate between the reciprocals of
 and , the area of the circle can be found to any required
degree of approximation.

If for simplicity we take the radius of the circle to be unity,
and commence with the inscribed and circumscribed squares, we
have








These numbers are found thus:  is the geometric mean between
 and ; that is, between  and , and  is the arithmetic
mean between  and , or between  and .
Again,  is the geometric mean between  and ; and  the
arithmetic mean between  and . Proceeding in this manner,
we find ; . Hence the area of a
circle radius unity, correct to seven decimal places, is equal to the
reciprocal of ; that is, equal to ; or the value
of  correct to seven places of decimals is . The
number  is of such fundamental importance in Geometry, that
mathematicians have devoted great attention to its calculation.
Mr. Shanks, an English computer, carried the calculation to
 places of decimals. The following are the first  figures
of his result:-




The result is here carried far beyond all the requirements
of Mathematics. Ten decimals are sufficient to give the circumference
of the earth to the fraction of an inch, and thirty
decimals would give the circumference of the whole visible
universe to a quantity imperceptible with the most powerful
microscope.


CONCLUSION.

In the foregoing Treatise we have given the
Elementary Geometry of the Point, the Line, and
the Circle, and figures formed by combinations of
these. But it is important to the student to remark,
that points and lines, instead of being distinct from,
are limiting cases of, circles; and points and planes
limiting cases of spheres. Thus, a circle whose
radius diminishes to zero becomes a point. If, on
the contrary, the circle be continually enlarged, it
may have its curvature so much diminished, that
any portion of its circumference may be made to
differ in as small a degree as we please from a right
line, and become one when the radius becomes infinite.
This happens when the centre, but not the
circumference, goes to infinity.










THE END.

